    P/1
        ADV 343/483, FALL 2018
              T/TH 12:30-1:45PM
                     CHAD REA
4.310 BMC, T/TH 9-12 & BY APPT
           VICTORIA LONG, TA


PREAMBLE
Hey. You’re new here. Welcome.
This is an exciting time. You are now officially a part of the famous Texas Creative sequence. It
took a lot of work to get here. And it will take an exponential amount of work to stay here, and
advance in the sequence.
And advancement is not guaranteed.
But more about that later. What’s important right now is that you’re ready to become fiercely
original conceptors, big-idea thinkers, and deceptively simple communicators.
Are there class goals? Sure, during this class, you’ll:
     • Develop your strategic thinking and insight-building skills
     • Become accustomed to the iterative process of idea creation
     • Work with teammates to develop integrated, multimedia campaigns
     • Present your ideas to your classmates, instructors, and visiting professionals
     • Strive to produce exceptional creative work in a deadline-based environment
     • Learn how to deliver, and accept, constructive criticism and feedback in class-based and
         otherwise public forum
     • Further your knowledge and skills of graphic design software
     • Learn how to work with different personalities
Students who do well in this class consistently:
     • Refuse to give up
     • Always show up
     • Take feedback and roll with it
     • Are students of the industry, pop culture, and the world
     • Deliver constructive feedback well and support and mentor others
     • Stay positive, professional, and energized
     • Exhibit confidence and share ideas bravely
Portfolio 1 is equal parts discovering your personal process and breaking the traditional
conventions of advertising. Strategic originality is what we strive for. As an old friend and agency
pro likes to say, “There are no right answers, only better ones.” Let’s find them.


HOW
We’ll meet twice a week, 90 minutes at a time.
Our time together is very important. This is the forum in which we’ll share ideas, and look at and
critique work. So come to class, and don’t be late. If you have more than two unexcused
absences, you will not advance in the Texas Creative sequence. This includes not showing up to
scheduled appointments during office hours. This is non-negotiable. And if you don’t participate in
class, or don’t show up at all, please don’t use office hours as a substitute. You need everybody’s
opinions. Everybody learns from your vision, from what you bring to class.
For your first campaign, you’ll be working solo, discovering what you do well, and where you need
to bolster your skills. For your remaining campaigns, you’ll be working in teams of two. For each
campaign that we work on during the semester, you’ll select the product (with my advice and
approval), and you’ll be split into two presentation groups (TUE/A and TH/B) so that we can be as
efficient as possible in sharing feedback during our two weekly meetings. In those meetings,
you’ll either be posting your roughs for all to see and discuss, or offering feedback to others.
In many ways, this class is meant to mirror the creative review process that you’ll find at
essentially every agency and creative shop out there. We’ll be discussing your work in front of the
entire class. Critiques take some getting used to. All feedback is intended to help you think, to
help your ideas grow, and to push you forward. Nothing is meant to hurt your feelings. But you’ll
need to get accustomed to hearing honest and direct opinions about your ideas, and sharing your
opinions about the work of others. And the ability to separate yourself from your work during
critiques is an essential skill for advancing in the sequence, and in the industry in general. It’s a
tough business, and most ideas die (we’ll talk about this all the time), but the process of creating,
and finishing, a great idea is an exhilarating experience.
The ideas that do survive the rounds of roughs in class get to head into the world of pixels, where
you’ll be executing those ideas to be the best they can be.
To be clear, not everyone who enrolls Portfolio 1 and participates in critique will advance to
Portfolio 2. You need to create consistently exceptional creative work, and exhibit highly
professional work habits, in order to be considered for advancement in the sequence. In short,
good isn’t good enough. Many people decide that this isn’t for them at different points in the
semester, and that’s OK. If you find yourself in this position, let’s talk about it and find another
path for you. Please note that Portfolio 1 cannot be retaken. You get one shot at it.
Let’s do great work. Push yourself. And we’ll push you, too. Always aim to do better work than
your last round. Support your classmates. You’re in it together. And you’ll lean on each other far
beyond class as alumni working in the professional world.
I’m excited to help you start your journey. Let’s get going.


MUSTS
More specific instructions as each is discussed in class.
1 FIFTEEN PIECES MINIMUM
You’ll be developing three integrated campaigns, including 3 print ads and 2 non-print ads per
campaign, for a total of fifteen pieces. You’ll be working solo, collaborating with partners, and
working with your classmates to share feedback and make each other better. You need to have
at least fifteen completed pieces in order to attend critique and be eligible for advancement in the
Texas Creative sequence.
2 FINAL CRITIQUE
You know, critique. That French word that serves as our yardstick and our goal. Let’s get there.
To do that, you’ll need at least fifteen pieces. Fifteen amazing pieces. Less than that and you’re
out. Miss more than two classes and you cannot participate. Students who do not participate in
critique by showing the required work will not advance in Texas Creative. I MUST SEE AND
APPROVE ALL WORK BEFORE CRITIQUE. WORK SHOWN AT CRITIQUE WITHOUT MY
APPROVAL MAY BE REMOVED. IF WORK IS REMOVED AND YOU DO NOT THEREFORE
MEET THE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS, YOU MAY NOT CONTINUE TO PARTICIPATE IN
CRITIQUE.
3 PINTREST BOARDS
Your digital scrapbook for creative inspiration, including the industry's best and worst examples
advertising, typography, photography, writing samples, packaging, and more. This is to be done
throughout the semester. An assignment sheet will be distributed early in the semester outlining
specifics of this project.
4 LYNDA.COM TUTORIALS
You will be participating in online tutorials to build your design software knowledge and skills. An
assignment sheet will be distributed early in the semester outlining specifics of this project.
5 PARTICIPATION
You are required to present your work in each class depending on your group (A or B). You must
participate by critiquing the work of your classmates during our class discussion, as well as with
comments online. We are all in this together. Give your peers the level of feedback you expect to
receive, if not more.


GRADES
Final Portfolio
Final Critique
                                  60%
                                  10%
Pintrest                          10%
Lynda                             10%
Participation                     10%
Attendance and participation are musts. Two unexcused absences will result in non-advancement
in the Texas Creative sequence. If you don’t attend and show the required and approved work at
critique, you can’t earn a grade higher than a D, unless you're pursuing an alternative project that
we've discussed and I have approved. Students pursuing an alternative project may not advance
in the Texas Creative sequence. Grades of C+ and lower mark the end of your participation in the
Texas Creative sequence.
Final letter grades are calculated as follows:
A 93.5 to 100 A- 89.5 to 93.4 B+ 86.5 to 89.5 B 83.5 to 86.4 B- 79.5 to 83.4 C+ 76.5 to 79.4
C 73.5 to 76.4 C- 69.5 to 73.4 D+ 66.5 to 69.4 D 63.5 to 66.4 D- 59.5 to 63.4 F 0 to 59.4
SUPPLIES
Below are the texts, subscriptions, and supplies that you will need throughout the semester:
TEXTS
THE ADVERTISING CONCEPT BOOK: THINK NOW, DESIGN LATER (2016) by Pete Barry
(FREE) SUBSCRIPTIONS
LYNDA.COM ACCOUNT
SUPPLIES
REAM (OR MORE) OF WHITE COPY PAPER (NOW)
BLACK SHARPIES (NOW)
XACTO KNIFE (CRITIQUE PREP)
METAL RULER OR T-SQUARE (CRITIQUE PREP)
SPRAY MOUNT (CRITIQUE PREP)
BLACK FOAM CORE (CRITIQUE PREP)
BLACK SHEET OR TABLECLOTH (CRITIQUE TABLE)


COURSE RESOURCES + INSPIRATION (NOT REQUIRED)
T. Iezzi The Idea Writers: Copywriting in the New Media and Marketing Era
Paul Arden It’s Not How Good You Are, It’s How Good You Want To Be
Pie Books Advertising Graphics With Impact
KesselsKramer Advertising for People Who Don’t Like Advertising
Anthony Burrill I Like It What Is It
KesselsKramer 2 Kilo
Crispin Porter Bogusky Hoopla
Tim Himpe Advertising Is Dead, Long Live Advertising
Margo Berman The Copywriter's Toolkit: The Complete Guide to Strategic Advertising Copy
Timothy Samara Making and Breaking the Grid: A Graphic Design Layout Workshop
Debbie Millman How to Think Like a Great Graphic Designer
Debbie Millman Brand Thinking and Other Noble Pursuits
Debbie Millman Brand Bible: The Complete Guide to Building, Designing, and Sustaining Brands
Richard Laermer, Mark Simmons Punk Marketing: Get Off Your Ass and Join the Revolution
Anything on Jenny Holtzer, Barbara Kruger, Yoko Ono, or Miranda July.
SUBSCRIBE/ FOLLOW/BOOKMARK
ADWEEK
ADVERTISING AGE
CREATIVITY-ONLINE.COM
COMMUNICATION ARTS
LURZER’S ARCHIVE
GRAPHIS
HOW
THE ONE SHOW
D&AD
THEFWA.COM
ADSOFTHEWORLD.COM
ADLAND.TV
HEYWHIPPLE.COM
LIVE LIFE
Be a sponge. Get out there, observe, study, deconstruct, document, and then produce. And
repeat.


INFO
Student Responsibilities:
1. Students are responsible for all material covered in class and all assigned readings and
viewings.
2. Students must complete readings and assignments by the times specified.
3. Check Canvas frequently, and make sure your e-mail address is current with the University so
that you can receive emails sent through Canvas. It is the student’s responsibility to maintain this
email address and ensure that it is correct and able to receive messages. Check your junk mail
too.
4. Any questions about grades must be submitted in writing within 5 days of when the grade is
posted to Canvas.
5. This course upholds the values of the University Policy of Scholastic Dishonesty. Students who
violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information,
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_whatis.php.
6. Technology can be a pain. So plan ahead. Do not wait until the last minute, or even hour. Work
posted or handed in late is late, regardless of technology errors, computer crashes, corrupt files,
or lack of internet access. I honor the Canvas or email timestamps, depending on the specified
submission format. Forgetting to attach files, or email bounce-backs, are not excuses.
Writing
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly
during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or
more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag
classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
Scholastic Dishonesty Statement
The Department of Advertising has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty for the College of Communication. By
enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities described in
that document. If the application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is
unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Policy on Scholastic


Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course an/or dismissal from the
University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
Campus Policy on Holy Days:
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity
to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support
for your learning.
The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
email address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily—to
stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can
find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Emergency evacuation recommendations:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
Policy on Campus Carry:
In the development of the policies adopted by President Fenves to comply with the law in a way
that prioritizes the safety of everyone on the campus, the concealed carry of handguns is strictly
prohibited in my office.


Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way,
there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
- Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-
471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
- CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
- Brief assessments and referral services
- Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
- MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
- Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html


WHEN
Part of the process of understanding the creation of visual communication in a changing world is
that you prepare yourself for uncertainty and surprises. Schedules change daily in this industry.
While I will make every effort to maintain this schedule, it is subject to change, depending on
class progress, unforeseen amazing opportunities, and other surprises. Being able to love and
accept this notion will make you a consummate professional.
TUESDAYS                                           THURSDAYS
                                                   30 AUG Introduction
04 SEPT 5/5/5 Due                                  06 SEPT Warm Up Ads Due
11 SEPT Warm Up Ads                                13 SEPT Camp. 1 Brief Due,
          Camp.1 Products (3) Due
18 SEPT Camp. 1: Copy/Sketches (A)                 20 SEPT Camp. 1: Copy/Sketches (B)
          100 Thumbnails Due
25 SEPT Camp. 1: Copy/Sketches (A)                 27 SEPT Camp. 1: Copy/Sketches (B)
02 OCT Camp. 1: Copy/Sketches (A)                  04 OCT Camp. 1: Copy/Sketches (B)
09 OCT Camp. 1: Copy/Sketches (A)                  11 OCT Camp. 1: Copy/Sketches (B)
                                                              Camp. 2 Products (3) Due
                                                   14 OCT Lynda Hours Complete/Due
16 OCT Camp. 2: Big Ideas (A)                      18 OCT Camp. 2: Big Ideas (B)
23 OCT Camp. 2: Big Ideas (A)                      25 OCT Camp. 2: Big Ideas (B)
30 OCT Camp. 2: Copy/Sketches (A)                  01 NOV Camp. 2: Copy/Sketches (B)
06 NOV Camp. 2: Copy/Sketches (A)                  08NOV Camp. 2: Copy/Sketches (B)
                                                             Camp. 3 Products (3) Due
13 NOV Camp. 3: Big Ideas (A)                      15 NOV Camp. 3: Big Ideas (B)
20 NOV Camp. 3: Big Ideas (A/B)                    22 NOV THANKSGIVING
                                                   25 NOV Pintrest Boards Due
27 NOV Camp. 3: Copy/Sketches (A)                  29 NOV Camp. 3: Copy/Sketches (B)
04 DEC Camp. 3: Copy/Sketches (A)                  06 DEC Camp. 3: Copy/Sketches (B)
04 DEC Camp. 3: Copy/Sketches (A)                  06 DEC Camp. 3: Copy/Sketches (B)
                                                   12 DEC Final Critique!
                                                              Peer Evaluations Due


WHO
CHAD REA
chadjrea@utexas.edu
BMC 4.310
Teaching Experience:
        Lecturer, The University of Texas at Austin, 2014-Present
        ADV 343K Portfolio 1
        ADV 468K Portfolio 2
        ADV 475K Portfolio 4
        ADV 378 Copywriting
        ADV 376/PR 377 Integrated Campaigns
        ADV 325 Intro to Creativity
        Stan Richards Faculty Fellow in Advertising Creativity 2016 - 2017
        Teacher, Art Center College of Design, 2002-2006
        Integrated Brand Communications, (Great Teacher Award 2002)
Degrees:
        Bachelor of Arts, Advertising, May 1993
        Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas
Professional Industry Experience:
        Full-Time:
        ecopop (Austin), Founder/Creative Director, 2008-Present
        Wieden+Kennedy (Portland), Creative Director, 2008-2009
        86 the onions (LA), Founder/Creative Director, 2002-2007
        KesselsKramer (Amsterdam), Senior Creative, 2000-2002
        Mother (London), Senior Creative, 1998-2000
        The Richards Group/Pyro (Dallas), Copywriter, 1994-1998
        Freelance:
        Mullen, Crispin Porter + Bogusky, JDK, Creature, mono, nemo, enso, attik, david &
        goliath, Butler Shine Stern, Strawberry Frog, TBWA/Chiat Day, Factory Labs, dw+h,
        Saatchi & Saatchi, MEplusYOU, mkg, Sedgwick Rd., sandymontana, Climate Reality
        Project (in-house), Curious Beast, The Butler Bros., DIKO, Preacher, etc.
Client Experience (160+ brands):
        Nike, Google, Target, Starbucks, Mountain Dew, ESPN X Games, Crackle, adidas,
        Diesel, Coca-Cola, Bacardi, Climate Reality Project, MTV, FUEL TV, Activision,
        HUMMER, Motel 6, Oakley, Samsung, Roland, Toyota, etc.
Professional recognition:
        Accolades: Effie, The One Club, D&AD, NY Art Directors, National Addys, The
        Creative Circle, British Television, Graphis, Communication Arts, Lurzer’s
        International Archive, Creativity, Print, ZOO, Creative Review, Shots, Eye, Campaign
        Screen


Book Features: Advertising Today, Punk Marketing: Get Off Your Ass And Join The
Revolution, I Like It. What Is It?, Advertising Graphics With Impact, Consumer Behavior:
Buyer, Having, Being (7th Edition), A Hundred And One Things To Do, 200% Cotton:
New T-Shirt Graphics, Touch This: Graphic Design That Feels Good, Dos Logos,
Introducing: Designs For Making A First Impression, 2 Kilo Of KesselsKramer, World
Business Cards Today, Letterhead & Logo Design 9, All Access: The Making Of Thirty
Extraordinary Graphic Designers, Sustainable Graphic Design: Tools, Systems And
Strategies For Innovative Print Design, Shovel It: Kick-Ass Advice To Turn Life’s Crap
Into The Peace And Happiness You Deserve
