                                          SUMMER 2020
                            INTRODUCTION TO NEW MEDIA &
                               EMERGING ENTERTAINMENT
                                              RTF 348
                               INSTRUCTOR: JAMES A. FINO
 WOFFORD DENIUS UTLA CENTER FOR ENTERTAINMENT AND MEDIA STUDIES,
                                    BURBANK, CALIFORNIA
                                         ONLINE COURSE
                                  Semester Credit Hours: 3
                         5PM – 8PM PST/ 7-10PM CST Tuesdays
                              Plus 1 asynchronous hour/week
       Office Hours Tuesdays 8-8:30PM PST/ 10-10:30 CST By Appointment
"The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 471-6259.”
COURSE OVERVIEW.
The intention of this class is to examine the evolution of storytelling experiences
beyond traditional film and television formats and delve into emerging
technologies and distribution platforms that are shaping today’s and tomorrow’s
entertainment content. In addition to lectures and in-class exploration of the
current and developing multi-platform interactive storytelling content, there will
be special guest speakers, industry professionals, who will share their career
achievements, challenges, and demonstrate advances in their area of the rapidly
evolving new media and gaming industry as well as field trips to see special
demonstrations of equipment and production.
Learning Objectives:
    1. Trace the evolution of new media multi-platform storytelling.
    2. Monitor emerging entertainment trends and technologies.
    3. Analyze an entertainment property to identify critical story elements.
    4. Identify all potential audiences for a story property.
    5. Identify optimal platforms for specific storytelling experience.
    6. Create unique storytelling experiences for these audiences.
    7. Create a multi-platform plan for a chosen entertainment property.
                                                                                               1


ASSIGNMENTS. Per the Canvas syllabus dates you can instantly access, you
will find written assignments are due to be posted onto Canvas no later than the
commencement of the next class session (e.g.: an assignment assigned on
Tuesday, it would be due the following Tuesday.) Please do not submit
printed material unless requested.
Post ALL written assignments (double-spaced) to Canvas. Include Your name
and Title of the Assignment (such as the Guest Speaker and the 5 questions
due). Extensions will be difficult to come by.          However, if extenuating
circumstances arise, like a death in the family or your own illness, please notify
me via text or email before the deadline so that we can discuss it.
SPECIAL GUEST SPEAKERS Innovative and industry pioneering professionals
from the Entertainment and New Media will be scheduled as available to join via
Zoom to offer their insights and personal experiences.
Owing to unpredictable schedules, there may be last minute changes which will
be communicated to all students via the class Facebook page and email. You
will be expected to research the speakers, companies, and their work
ahead of time to ask them questions in class or on location IN
ADDITION to the assigned questions you will be posting on Canvas-
this is part of your grade. This is a unique opportunity for you to speak
directly with professionals working on state of the art projects. These
visits are highly valuable and you will be expected to participate in the
Q&A for each speaker.
ABSENCES /TARDY. See above in “Assignments.” Allow plenty of time for
your commute, (to the classroom as well as various field trip locations) as L.A.
traffic is both congested and unpredictable. If you have a legitimate scheduling
problem (this does NOT include business lunches, family visits and
screenings!) Please contact me prior to class via email, text, or a phone call to
the office (747-283-1756).
Every On-Time class attendance will fully count towards your semester
attendance grade, however each instance of being TARDY without any prior
approval will result on you only receiving 80% of that evening’s class attendance
credit and an ABSENCE will result in 0% credit for that evening’s class
attendance credit unless discussed with me prior to the class date. Early exits
will have the same effect as a TARDY.
YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE for fulfilling the requirements of this class and
will receive the grade you earn only by doing so.
                                                                                  2


RECOMMENDED INDUSTRY LINKS.
Deadline Hollywood http://www.deadline.com/hollywood/
DarkHorizons http://www.darkhorizons.com/
Io9.com (and all the related sites) http://io9.com/
Variety http://www.variety.com/
Hollywood Reporter http://www.hollywoodreporter.com
Deadline Hollywood http://www.deadline.com/hollywood/
Tubefilter News http://news.tubefilter.tv/
Cynopsis http://www.cynopsis.com/ is a free daily trade publication for the TV
industry. Also has Kids, Digital, and Classified versions.
Animation Magazine http://www.animationmagazine.net covers the latest news
in animation for feature films, TV, new media, video games, and visual effects.
Animation World Network http://www.awn.com covers animation and visual
effects for feature films, TV, video games, commercials, and is a great resource
for classified jobs.
Social Media Today http://socialmediatoday.com/
Fierce Wireless http://www.fiercewireless.com is the wireless industry’s daily
monitor.
A NOTE ON QUIZES AND ASSIGNMENTS. This is a course about evolving
storytelling in emerging new media technologies and platforms. Although you
will not be tested on the scientific budgetary or scientific details of the
technologies discussed, our class discussions will test your comprehension of the
overall concepts of the emerging storytelling media platforms and the impact of
these breakthroughs on audiences and the Industry and contribute to your class
participation grade.
ZOOM ETIQUETTE POLICY.
IT IS REQUIRED FOR YOU TO APPEAR ON CAMERA DURING ALL CLASSROOM
ZOOM SESSION. NO STILL PICURES OR NAME TAGS ACCEPTED IN YOUR
PLACE.
NO WORKING ON OUTSIDE CLASS ASSISGNMENTS OR SOCIAL NETWORKING
DURING CLASS TIME.
                                                                                3


COURSE GRADING SCALE
Letter
        Range
Grade
A       100% to 94.0%
A-      < 94.0% to 90.0%
B+      < 90.0% o 87.0%
B       < 87.0% to 84.0%
B-      < 84.0% to 80.0%
C+      < 80.0% to 77.0%
C       < 77.0% to 74.0%
C-      < 74.0% to 70.0%
D+      < 70.0% to 67.0%
D       < 67.0% to 64.0%
D-      < 64.0% to 61.0%
F       < 61.0% to 0.0%
                         4


COURSE GRADE PERCENTAGE BREAKDOWN
Class Attendance (9 Classes + 9 asynchronous hrs)                 10%
Weekly Postings (Weeks 2-9) on Canvas of 4                        10%
Articles each week with 150 word summaries.
Articles must be relevant to the topic of Entertainment
Transmedia industry news, breakthroughs, deals,
and storytelling and must be current within the
week of the assignment. (32 total)
Posting on Canvas of five questions intended for
Each Guest Speaker                                                5%
Group of Transmedia Campaign Assignments:                         75%
Group Breakdown:
1. Reading Assignment from Andrea Phillips’                        (5%)
“A Creator’s Guide To Transmedia Storytelling”
Chapters 1, 2, 5, 6, 10 & 13 for class discussion.
Plus the choosing
and posting of an entertainment property onto
Canvas with a 300 word length description
which will become each student’s topic to develop
a transmedia campaign from over the Semester
2. In-class activity: brainstorm story
Extension ideas, and potential audiences                          (10%)
3. In-class team activity: Research an
Entertainment property and “Eventize”
Milestones throughout the phases of the
Transmedia campaign (pre-launch, launch,
Post-launch).                                                     (10%)
4. Transmedia Campaign Quiz                                       (10%)
5. Transmedia Campaign 10 page paper Report                       (20%)
6. Transmedia Campaign in-class Presentation                      (20%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
TOTAL COURSE GRADE                                                100%
                                                                           5


Note that if you do not turn in your Final Transmedia Campaign report
and show up to present it to the class, you cannot pass this class!
The University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of
Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to
uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as
cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and
any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or
misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test,
quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By
accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to
them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student’s learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate
University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. For more information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the
Student Judicial services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
Religious Holidays: Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and
examination schedules. If you miss an assignment or other project due to the
observance of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete
the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of
the University of Texas at Austin that you must notify your instructor at least
fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to
observe a religious holy day.
                                                                                 6


WEEKLY SCHEDULE (Subject to Change)
CLASS #1: INTRODUCTIONS
(Tues. Jun. 2)
What’s my story? What’s your story? What’s New about New Media?
Assignment:
Homework: Post a minimum of 4 articles on Transmedia entertainment news on
Canvas in corresponding class assignment complete with summary of each.
Reading Assignment from Andrea Phillips’ “A Creator’s Guide To Transmedia
Storytelling” Chapters 1, 2
CLASS #2: STORYTELLING THE NEXT GEN (PART I)
(Tues. Jun. 9)
GUEST SPEAKER: TBD
Assignment:
Homework: Post a minimum of 4 articles on Transmedia entertainment news on
Canvas in corresponding class assignment complete with summary of each.
Reading Assignment from Andrea Phillips’ “A Creator’s Guide To Transmedia
Storytelling” Chapters 5, 6
Post list of 5 questions intended for Guest
Speaker.
CLASS #3: STORYTELLING THE NEXT GEN (PART II)
(Tues. Jun. 16)
GUEST SPEAKER: TBD
How you tell your story depends on where you tell it.
Traditional structure vs. New Media structure.
Assignment:
Homework: Post a minimum of 4 articles on Transmedia entertainment news on
Canvas in corresponding class assignment complete with summary of each.
Reading Assignment from Andrea Phillips’ “A Creator’s Guide To Transmedia
Storytelling” Chapters 10, 13
                                                                         7


Choose individual Entertainment Property for Transmedia discussion for Class 4.
Post list of 5 questions intended for Guest
Speaker.
CLASS #4 TRANSMEDIA/ ASSIGNMENT OF FINAL PROJECT
(Tues. Jun. 23)
GUEST SPEAKER: TBD
Why many platforms can tell different parts of your story better than one. In-
class Transmedia Mapping assignment.
Assignment:
In-Class: Discuss individual       Entertainment   Property  choices  for   Final
Paper/Presentation.
Post: Initial transmedia brainstorm on your individual choices to explore every
possible type of story extension events and media platforms.
Homework: Post a minimum of 4 articles on Transmedia entertainment news on
Canvas in corresponding class assignment complete with summary of each.
Post list of 5 questions intended for Guest
Speaker’s visit
CLASS #5: VR and AR
(Tues. Jun. 30)
GUEST SPEAKER: TBD
A new wave of media is emerging thanks to the off the shelf availability of
mobile phones and headgear that can be worn to give viewers a 360 interactive
experience. Whether strapped on your face or viewed on a tablet or even
projecting inside a 360 Dome, these new 360 and live-layered media experiences
are being produced by hobbyists and major studios alike.
Assignment:
In-Class: “Eventizing” team activity
Homework: Post a minimum of 4 articles on Transmedia entertainment news on
Canvas in corresponding class assignment complete with summary of each.
Post list of 5 questions intended for Guest Speaker.
                                                                                8


CLASS #6 DEVELOPING AND PRODUCING VIDEO GAMES
(Tues. Jul. 7)
GUEST SPEAKER: TBD
An overview of gaming concept, design, and production for emerging consoles
and mobile devices.
Homework: Post a minimum of 4 articles on Transmedia entertainment news on
Canvas in corresponding class assignment complete with summary of each.
Post list of 5 questions intended for Guest
Speaker.
CLASS #7: SPECIAL VENUES
(Tues. Jul. 14)
Building interactive worlds and engineering multi-sensory experiences in special
theaters like planetariums, aquariums, theme parks, and simulators.
Assignment:
Homework: Post a minimum of 4 articles on Transmedia entertainment news on
Canvas in corresponding class assignment complete with summary of each.
Assign Transmedia Campaign Quiz- due next week.
Post list of 5 questions intended for Guest
Speaker.
CLASS #8 ANIMATION /VFX
(Tues. Jul. 21)
POTENTIAL VIRTUAL FIELD TRIP- STARBURNS INDUSTRIES
From Traditional 2D to stop-motion, and CG, animation has evolved from short
cartoons to lush features and has significantly enhanced film, tv, videogame, and
live performance storytelling. We will explore the potential of this important tool.
Assignment: Homework: Post a minimum of 4 articles on Transmedia
entertainment news on Canvas in corresponding class assignment complete with
summary of each.
Post list of 5 questions intended for Guest Speaker
                                                                                  9


CLASS #9: FINAL PROJECT PRESENTATIONS
(Tues. Jul. 28)
Final Transmedia Class Presentation and Paper Due
Start creating your new world of content!
Testing your new storytelling skills.
                                                  10
