    EDP 382F: Dysfunction in Human Behavior and Social Organization
                                                73910
                                          Summer 2020
Class Meets: Summer I session June 4-July 9 online
                Weekly Zoom course meetings Thursday 10:30a-12p
Instructor:     Sara Carpenter, Ph.D., CSC
Prounouns: she/her
Email:          sara.carpenter@austin.utexas.edu
Office hours: Zoom by appointment
TA:
Pronouns:
Email:
Office hours: Zoom by appointment
                                             Course Description
Course Description:
While counseling is a field that specializes in wellness, counselors and other mental health
professionals need to be understand and recognize abnormal behavior. Multiple theories abound on
the etiology, promulgation and maintenance of abnormal behavior. Counselors need to understand the
construct of abnormal behavior is a social construction and thus may be defined differently by cultures,
families and society. We will examine the theories of abnormal psychology, current research through
the lens of a socio-cultural model. We will also examine social and group dynamics that can elicit
abnormal behavior from “normal” people. Furthermore, we will address how to intervene when
abnormal behavior and/or traumatic events lead to a crisis situation.
What will I learn?
Learning Outcomes
• Identify history of definitions of abnormal psychopathology
• Prepare students for a study of psychopathology as outlined in DSM-5
• Explore the role of cultural context in identifying abnormal behavior (including nationality, culture,
    race and
• ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, etc.)
• Understand research and diagnostic approaches in understanding abnormal behavior
• Understand treatment approaches, both historical and current and the underlying beliefs of those
    treatment
• approaches.
• To learn where, when, and how to apply specific interventions to alleviate crises, prevent problems
    from developing, and/or address existing needs and problems
• To explore conceptual, strategic, and technical components of mental health interventions with an
    in-depth focus on those that protect personal safety or prevent problems from escalating
                                                                                                   Page 1


How will I learn?
The web-based course will have synchronous and asynchronous components. Students will complete
weekly modules and attend a weekly, live Zoom course meeting.
                                          Course Requirements
Required Materials There is 1 required textbook, listed below. Additional readings will be posted on
Canvas or assigned in class throughout the semester. You are also encouraged to find relevant readings
and supplemental resources you find interesting or that may be helpful for your own counselor
development.
Required Textbook:
Miller, R. B. (2015). Not so abnormal psychology: A pragmatic view of mental illness. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Recommended Resource:
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th
ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
**Available online through UT’s Library
Required Devices:
Access to the internet is required for success in this course. All assignments, lectures, and course
materials will be accessed and submitted on Canvas. Students will be required to use their UT Zoom
account. Please let your instructor know ASAP if you encounter technical difficulties that might delay
your completion or submission of a course expectation. Contact IT Services for assistance resolving
technical issues at help@utexas.edu or (512) 475-9400.
Classroom Expectations
Class Attendance Our weekly Zoom course meetings will begin promptly at 10:30 am. Please plan to
the best of your ability to ensure that you are ready to learn at the beginning of class. Consistent
tardiness will negatively impact your final grade. Due to the abbreviated nature of the course, all
students must attend each Zoom course meeting. An absence jeopardizes your ability to pass the class.
You must notify the instructor at least 24- hours prior to any absence, except in cases of emergency.
Zoom Etiquette
    • Try to log online to our class meeting from a quiet, distraction-free environment. We have little
        time together; let’s try to maximize it!
    • Keep your Audio on mute until you want to speak. We must work together to limit background
        noise. When you want to speak, be sure to unmute yourself to talk.
    • Use Video whenever possible. You might need to disable video if you need to minimize the
        activity on your internet connection.
    • Remember that Chat is public, and may be recorded, and archived.
    • Have a plan for taking notes (paper and pencil, digital notepad, Word/Pages doc). You should
        also try to capture your thoughts and questions in the moment.
Assignments
    1) Quiz #1
                                                                                                     Page 2


2) Quiz #2
3) Weekly Discussion Board Posts
4) Psychological First Aid Training
5) Independent Research
6) Diagnostic Group Project
7) Course Participation
   1 & 2) Online quizzes Students will complete two online quizzes. The quizzes will be completed
   online, in an open book format consisting of multiple choice, True/False, short answer and/or
   case analyses.
   3) Weekly Discussion Board Posts Students will respond to an initial discussion board prompt,
   and reply to two of their peers’ posts. Your initial post must be made by Monday at midnight.
   Read all Module components before posting your initial thoughts. You then must respond to
   two other classmates on two different days, final posting by Wednesday at midnight.
   Participation in discussion activities will be measured by the content and dates on the
   discussion postings. Please do not wait to the last minute to post your ideas. Posting early gives
   others the opportunity to give you feedback on your thoughts and ideas. All postings must
   support the weekly topic and assigned readings. When responding to others, provide ideas of
   why you agree or disagree related to the weekly topic. See the rubric on Canvas.
   4) Psychological First Aid Training Psychological First Aid (PFA) is an approach designed to
   reduce initial distress from traumatic events and crisis situations. You will be expected to
   complete an interactive 6-hour online course on PFA through the National Child Traumatic
   Stress Network. You may register for free at https://learn.nctsn.org/enrol/index.php?id=38.
   You will need to submit proof of course completion by uploading your training certificate to
   Canvas by 10:30a on Thursday, June 25.
   5) Independent Research Students will research a selected “dysfunctional” behavioral pattern
   (a diagnostic category, a social phenomenon) for independent research. They will consider the
   etiology (the cause) of this set of behavioral patterns from a minimum of two theoretical
   categories and identify interventions for these behavioral patterns. Examples of dynamics
   include, but are not limited to, DSM-5 diagnostic categories or dysfunctional social dynamics
   (bullying, social conformity, etc.). After researching this dynamic, the students will write a 5-7-
   page paper (not including title and reference page) using a minimum of 5 academic sources to
   support their arguments. The paper will be completed using APA format. Submit your paper on
   Canvas by 10:30a on Thursday, June 25.
   6) Diagnostic Group Project You will work in assigned groups of 3-4 students to explore a
   diagnostic category from the DSM 5. Your group will need to create or find a case example of
   selected diagnostic category (e.g., character from the media, myth, parable, tv show, or media).
   Do not use famous people or politicians as it is unethical to apply psychological knowledge on
   people who are not your client. You will then produce a presentation on this category that
   examines the following:
       1. Diagnostic criteria according to DSM-5
       2. Etiology (the cause) from a minimum of two theoretical categories
       3. Societal and cultural factors that contribute to the dysfunctional behavior (sex/gender,
           race/ethnicity, spiritual beliefs, disability status, etc.)
                                                                                                 Page 3


             4. A minimum of one evidence-based treatment approach for this behavior.
         The presentation will be submitted as a Zoom recording, after creating a slideshow and
         Zooming with your peers to deliver the accompanying audio. The presentation will be evaluated
         according to a) the degree to which the presentation covers the criteria listed above, b) the
         degree to which all members participate as evidenced in the presentation, and c) by peer
         evaluation of each member’s participation. Submit your presentation on Canvas by 11:59 pm
         on Thursday, July 9.
         7) Course Participation This course is 100% online. You will participate in weekly live Zoom
         online course meetings. Participation points will include punctual attendance, engaged in
         discussions, asking relevant questions, participating in the live meeting with no outside use of
         technology.
Dr. Carpenter is grateful to the following colleagues for their help and shared resources in designing
this course: Dr. Leslie Moore and Dr. Lindsey Webster.
Grading for this Course
         Assignments / Exams                   Points Possible            Percent of Total Grade
               Quiz #1                             18 points
                                                   18 points                       15%
               Quiz #2
   Weekly Discussion Board Posts             40 points x 4 posts                   20%
                                                 = 160 points
        Independent Research                       30 points                       15%
  Psychological First Aid Training                 10 points                        5%
      Diagnostic Group Project                     30 points                       25%
                                       2 points x 6 course meetings
          Course Participation                    =12 points                       20%
Course Outline
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website
at https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course
schedule.
Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you
receive the changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
              Module                       Assigned Readings                     Assignments due
                                            Week 1: June 4 – 11
                           Zoom Course Meeting Thursday, June 4 at 10:30a-12p
 Course Overview: what is          Miller, Ch. 1                          Complete Module
 abnormal?
                                                                                                     Page 4


                              Miller, Ch. 2                      Quiz #1 available June 12-14
Context & Culture             Ayan article
                                                                 Discussion Board #1 initial post
Theories: Biomedical Models   Miller, Ch. 3 (pp. 61-75)
                                                                 by June 8, replies by June 10
                              Kring article, pp. 115-127
and Psychodynamic
                              ______
                                         Week 2: June 11-18
               Zoom Course Meeting Thursday, June 11 at 10:30a-12p (review Week 1)
                              Codrington article
Theories: Attachment and      Liotti article
Neuroscience                  Gillath TedTalk
                              Murphy article
                                                                 Complete Module
Theories: Humanistic and      Miller, Ch. 3 (pp. 75-83)
Cognitive                     Kuyken article                     Quiz #2 available June 19-21
                              Miller, Ch. 3 (pp. 83- 93)         Discussion Board #2 initial post
                              Asch article                       by June 15, replies by June 17
Theories: Beyond the
                              Darley article
Individual (Systems &
                              Milgram article
Psychosocial Approaches)
                              Sherif article
                              Brock article
                                        Week 3: June 18 – 25
               Zoom Course Meeting Thursday, June 18 at 10:30a-12p (review Week 2)
                              Juhnke article
Crisis Intervention: Suicidal Minton article                     Complete Module
Ideation                      Batty article
                                                                 Discussion Board #3 initial post
                                                                 by June 22, replies by June 24
Crisis Intervention & Trauma: Miller, Ch. 4                      Psychological First Aid Training
                              Dr. Harris ACES podcast            due June 25 by 10:30a
Traumatic Events and          Lenz article
Disasters                     Brack article
                                                                 Independent Research Paper
                                                                 Due June 25 by 10:30a
                                      Week 4: June 25 – July 2
               Zoom Course Meeting Thursday, June 25 at 10:30a-12p (review Week 3)
                              Miller, Ch. 5
Anxiety & Related Conditions Remes Ted Talk                      Complete Module
                              Miller, Ch. 6                      Discussion Board #4 initial post
Depression & Related                                             by June 29, replies by July 1
                              Greenfieldboyce, audio
Conditions                    Hankin article
                                          Week 5: July 2 - 9
                Zoom Course Meeting Thursday, July 2 at 10:30a-12p (review Week 4)
                                                                                              Page 5


                                   Miller, Ch. 7
 Personality Disorders             Crashcourse: Personality
                                   Disorders                             Complete Module
                                                                         Diagnostic Group Project due
                                   Miller, Ch. 8
                                   Longden, TED Talk                     July 9 by 11:59p
 Schizophrenia                     Prozek article 1
                                   Prozek article 2
                Final Zoom Course Meeting Thursday, July 9 at 10:30a-12p (review Week 5)
                                                  Policies
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available
through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if
you would like.
Grading Policies
          Grade          Cutoff
          A              94%
          A-             90%
          B+             87%
          B              84%
          B-             80%
          C+             77%
          C              74%
          C-             70%
          D              65%
          F              <65%
Late Work
All assignments must be turned in on time. At the discretion of the instructor, late assignments may be
docked a letter grade for that assignment for each day it is late (e.g., an assignment graded as an "A”
would receive a “B” if a day late, a “C” if two days late, and so on).
Student Rights & Responsibilities:
• You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
• You have a right to respect.
• You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
• You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
                                                                                                    Page 6


•    You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
•    You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
     learning environment.
•    You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
     isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With the above rights come responsibilities:
• You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
     teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
• You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. •
     Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it,
     and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
• You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
     excluded.
• You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
     these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make
appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. If you use words or
ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources.
Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including
failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the
University Honor Code, which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
To drop a class after the 12th class day, you must complete a Q-drop before the Q-drop deadline,
which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q-
drops at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. There are also a variety of resources on campus:
                                                                                                      Page 7


Accessibility and Inclusion:
The university is committed to creating an accessible and inclusive learning environment consistent
with university policy and federal and state law. Please let me know if you experience any barriers to
learning so I can work with you to ensure you have equal opportunity to participate fully in this course.
If you are a student with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and need accommodations
please contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). Please refer to SSD’s website for contact
and more information: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are already registered with SSD,
please deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as possible in the semester so we can discuss
your approved accommodations and needs in this course.
Counseling and Mental Health Center:
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are
many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is
learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety
or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. 24/7 Crisis Line at (512) 471-2255; Web
address: http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
More than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
improve their academic performance. All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring
for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please
visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc, call 512-471-3614, or visit their office in JES A332.
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL
(the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050, or submit your concerns on their web form at
https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line. Your call/submission can be
anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your
concerns.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free
from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university
can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
                                                                                                    Page 8


2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
    become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If
you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and
resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Recording Policy
Excluding students with a documented disability, the use of electronic recording devices in class are
prohibited without prior permission of the instructor.
                                                                                                    Page 9
