                                   INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
                                       ALD 322/Unique #09375
                                   Tuesday / Thursday: 9:30 – 11:00
                                              UTC 4.122
                                          Fall 2018 Syllabus
Instructor:             Laura Rojeski, Ph.D., BCBA-D, LBA
                        Department of Special Education
                        Office: SZB 440L
                        Mailbox: SZB 306
                        Email: lrojeski@utexas.edu
Office Hours:           Tuesday/Thursday: 11:00am – 12:30pm (or by appointment)
Teaching Assistant: Nataly Lim, M.Ed.
                        Office: SZB 242G
                        Email: nlim94@utexas.edu
Office Hours:           Tuesday: 2:00pm – 3:00pm and Wednesday: 2:00pm – 4:00pm (or by
                        appointment)
**If you talk with us in class about an issue, please follow-up by email so there is
documentation of our conversation.**
Course Description
This course provides an introduction to individual differences focusing on various
exceptionalities across the age span. Course content will include definitions, methodologies,
legal aspects, trends and issues and current research related to individuals with intellectual and
developmental disabilities, learning disabilities, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder,
emotional and behavioral disorders, autism spectrum disorders, communication disorders,
deafness and hard of hearing, blindness/low vision, low incidence and multiple/severe
disabilities, physical disabilities and/or special health impairments, and gifts and talents. All
issues will be discussed in the context of family involvement, cultural and linguistic diversity,
and a lifespan focus. Although the class is not intended solely for pre-service educators, most of
the lectures/class activities will focus on teaching students with disabilities in the classroom.
Cultural Diversity in the United States
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses
are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural
experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that
has experienced persistent marginalization.
Course Objectives


1. Students will increase their knowledge about and sensitivity toward persons with
    exceptionalities.
2. Students will acquire a knowledge of the following concepts related to exceptionalities:
         a. Legal and theoretical definitions
         b. Prevalence and etiologies
         c. Educational and social/emotional characteristics
         d. Family involvement and dynamics
         e. Life span issues, and
         f. Assistive technology.
3. Students will gain knowledge and understanding of the socio-cultural and linguistic factors
    that influence perceptions of disability, quality of life, and services for persons with special
    needs.
                        I. Course Requirements and Considerations
Required Textbook
Hallahan, D., Kauffman, J., & Pullen, P. (2013). Exceptional Learners: An introduction to
         special education (13th edition). Upper Saddle River: NJ: Pearson. This text is available
         as an etext or as a loose-leaf book. You are welcome to purchase either option.
Class Attendance
Students are expected to attend all class sessions; however, class attendance will not be
considered in grading. However, I will take class attendance as I have to report to various UT
entities from time to time regarding attendance. You DO NOT need to inform me if you will be
absent for class; however, consistent class attendance is recommended for the following reasons:
    • The reading material will be further explained in class and linked to in-class activities.
    • Various in-class activities have points attached to them and are worth a large portion of
         your grade so it can determine final grades. Make up work for missed classes will NOT
         be allowed, except in cases with prior approval (e.g., religious holy days, UT sports, etc.)
         or in cases of emergency (e.g., sudden severe illness/injury, death in the family, etc.)
         Missing a class or two throughout the semester due to common cold/illness will NOT
         constitute a valid reason for make-up work, but prolonged illness with documentation
         will.
    • In-class discussions will cover material from sources other than readings.
    • Guest speakers will cover selected topics from a personal/professional perspective.
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class schedules. If you miss a class session,
assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an
opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the
policy of The University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least
fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious
holy day, or on the first day of class if the religious holiday falls within the first two weeks of the
semester.
Class Participation
Each student is expected to attend each class session and to participate in class discussions and
activities. Class sessions will be a mixture of lecture, discussion, and in-class activities. In order


to effectively participate in each class session, students should complete all of the assigned
readings prior to coming to class and be prepared to discuss/apply the readings during class.
Students are also required to bring their textbook and any supplemental materials to class to
facilitate discussion and participation in class activities. Being a good participant does not
require that you address every question posed. You should, however, try to address questions or
comments, posed by the instructor and your class members on a regular basis. Your responses
should be thoughtful and always respectful of others, even when you may disagree with their
perspective.
Canvas
This course will utilize Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-
protected site is created for each course. Canvas will be used to distribute course materials, to
communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and possibly to take
online quizzes and surveys. You will be responsible for learning how to use and checking the
Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements. For help with Canvas, click on
“help” on the course website main page and follow the instructions corresponding to the issue, or
call the ITS helpdesk at 512-475-9400. Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu
Course Rules/Requirements
1. Regular and punctual attendance, as described previously.
2. Assigned readings need to be completed in advance of each class session. Students should
     be prepared to ask any questions that might have arisen from the assigned materials and
     participate in class discussions and activities derived from the readings.
3. This course will emphasize understanding of the material above memorization. Therefore,
     when completing assigned readings, each student should attempt to: (a) synthesize the
     critical issues discussed in each reading, (b) think about how these critical issues relate to
     your own personal/professional experiences, and (c) think about how these critical issues
     may impact the work you plan to do in the future.
     Course assignments are expected to be completed and turned in on time. ALL assignments
     other than ICAs and in-class exams must be submitted electronically in Canvas. All
     assignments (including the Take-Home Exam) will be considered late and scored as 0
     points if not uploaded to Canvas on time (no paper copies accepted). An assignment will
     be considered late based on the due date and time specified for each assignment in the
     syllabus, on the assignment documents, in the ppt or on the course website. Failure to
     understand how to use Canvas or a computer difficulty is not an excuse for a late
     assignment. Late assignments may be considered with an excused medical absence (note
     from doctor/UT Health center required) or there is a clear, documented emergency. You
     must register with the UT Student Emergency Services as documentation of the emergency;
     they must email me directly. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
     If you have no documentation for your absence, your excuse will not be considered.
     You must contact the instructor or TA by email as soon as possible regarding your medical
     or emergency situation.
4. In-Class Activities (ICA) CANNOT be made up as these occur during class time and require
     live participation. If students have a documented and or prior approval for missing days,


    opportunities to make up points will be provided as necessary. Tests CANNOT be made up
    unless test days conflict with religious holidays, you have provided the instructor with a
    known prior excused absence (e.g., mandatory sports game, planned medical procedure), or
    have a sudden documented illness or emergency. Please notify the instructor and TA in
    advance of any known prior conflicts with Test dates to reschedule (e.g., religious holidays,
    scheduled to play in team sports event if you are an athlete). If you miss an exam due to a
    documented illness or emergency, your exam will be different questions than provided in
    class.
5. On all written assignments, students are expected to use person-first language (see RTC/IL,
    2013 – Guidelines for Reporting about People with Disabilities available at
    http://rtcil.org/products/media/guidelines/language
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information please visit the
Student Judicial Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
If you are suspected of academic dishonesty, I will refer your case directly to the Student Judicial
Services office. They will consider the evidence and make a decision.
University Safety Policy
Please read through the following safety recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from
the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
    • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
        evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
        requires exiting and assembling outside.
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
    • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
        the first week of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    • Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
        Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
        Services office.
    • If you notice concerning behaviors in a friend, coworker, or classmate, call the
        university’s anonymous Behavior Concerns Advice Line at 512-232-5050. If you feel
        there is imminent danger or threat, call 911; your call will be routed to the correct
        dispatch office according to your location.


     •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
         can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
     •   Other important Emergency Information: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
Important Dates for Fall Semester 2018
Please see the following website for a complete list of important dates in The University of
Texas at Austin Calendar: https://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/18-19
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification
policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or
her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in
order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice a week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-
mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html. In this course
e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for
checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require accommodations need to get a letter that documents the
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of
Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This
letter should be presented to the instructor at the beginning of the semester and accommodations
needed should be discussed at that time. See the following website for more information:
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
Course Foci: Course content, assignments, activities, and assessments are linked to the Council
for Exceptional Children and State Board of Educator Certification (SBEC) Standards. The
corresponding SBEC standards are in parentheses.
1. Rights and responsibilities of students, parents, teachers and other professionals and school
related to exceptional learning needs. CC1K4 (1.9K)
2. Articulate personal philosophy of working with students with diverse needs. CC1S1
3. Educational definitions and issues related to the identification of individuals with disabilities.
GC1K1 (1.3k, 1.4k, 5.4k)
4. Principles of normalization and concept of least restrictive environment. GC1K8 (1.7k,
1.1k)
5. Include plans for differentiating instruction in specific lesson plans. CC7S10 (6.2s)
6. Select and use specialized instructional strategies appropriate to the abilities and needs of the
individual. GC6S2
7. Prevention and intervention strategies for individuals at risk. GC4K4 (1.3s)
8. Use instructional practices based on knowledge of the child, family, community and the
curriculum. EC4S1
9. Modify homework, grading, and testing appropriate to the abilities and needs of the individual.
10. Use knowledge of future education settings to develop learning experiences and select
instructional strategies for young children. EC4S2
11. Prepare young children for successful transitions. EC4S3
12. Effects an exceptional condition(s) can have on an individual’s life. CC3K1 (4.10k)


13. Differing ways of learning of individuals with exceptional learning needs, including those
from culturally diverse backgrounds, and strategies for addressing these differences.
CC3K5
14. Relate levels of support to the needs of the individual. GC3S1 (1.7k, 4.2s, 9.7k) 3
15. Identify and prioritize areas of the general curriculum and accommodations for individuals
with exceptional learning needs. CC7S1 (4.3s)
16. Understanding the major demands of learning environments. CC5K1 (6.2k)
17. Basic classroom and behavior management models, principles, and strategies for individuals
with exceptional learning needs. CC5K2 (6.1k, 6.2k, 7.3k)
18. Recognition of classroom rules that involve and benefit students with special needs.
GC5S6
19. Identification of classroom situations for which procedures are needed.
20. Establish consistent classroom routines. BD5S1
21. Knowledge of a range of prevention and intervention strategies for individuals whose
behavior interferes with their learning or the learning of others. BD4K4
22. Emphasis on the use of positive behavior interventions and supports for creating/increasing
appropriate behavior.
23. Understand the use of assistive and instructional technologies. GC5S2 (6.17s, 8.6k, 8.3s,
8.6s, 8.7s)
24. National, state or provincial and local accommodations and modifications for accountability
assessment. CC8K5
25. Procedures for early identification of young children who may be at risk for disabilities.
GC8K4.
26. Roles of general and special educators in working with individuals with exceptional learning
needs, families, and school and community personnel in planning of an individualized program.
CC10K2 (3.3k, 3.4k, 3.5k, 3.1s)
27. Communicate with school personnel about the characteristics and needs of individuals with
exceptional learning needs. CC10S9 (1.2s, 3.9s)
                         II. Course Requirements and Evaluation
Your grade will depend on your level of participation and the quality of your work in completing
the following assignments (described in the next section below). All of your assignments
(except ICAs and in class exams) MUST be uploaded or entered into Canvas; I will not
accept paper copies of assignments. For some assignments, you will upload Word documents;
for other assignments, you will be required to scan original documents as PDFs and upload the
PDF as part of your assignments. For some assignments, you may be able to upload a photo of
the document to Canvas. Check with the TA or professor as to whether or not a photo will be
accepted or if a scan is required. There is a free app, CamScanner, that can convert pictures to
PDFs or the Information Technology Office (ITO) in the Sanchez building has computers
available to scan documents into PDFs.
http://www.edb.utexas.edu/education/ito/facilities/comp_facilities/
Other locations with scanners:
http://wiki.lib.utexas.edu/hdi/pmwiki.php/Main/FindAScanner
It is your responsibility to ensure your assignment has been uploaded properly. For each of the
assignments below, the numbers in brackets refer to the Course foci previously listed on pg. 6-7.


ASSIGNMENTS/REQUIREMENTS
1. Assistive and Instructional Technology (AIT) Lab Visitation (15 points) [12, 14, 23]
One scheduled orientation visit to the Assistive and Instructional Technology Lab in SZB 518e is
required to better acquaint students in ALD 322 with the use of assistive technology (AT) across
a number of settings in which individuals with special needs work, learn, and live.
    • You will need to sign-up for a visit to the lab – the sign-up period begins January 25th,
        2019. See AIT lab orientation document uploaded to Canvas which has the information
        in the document regarding sign up procedures and other details. The actual orientations
        begin on February 8th, 2019 and end on May 3rd, 2019. I strongly advise that you sign
        up as soon as you can – this class is not the only class doing these visits so spots fill
        quickly. Work directly with the AIT lab supervisor (Ashley Bagwell at
        afbagwell@utexas.edu) if you encounter problems in signing up.
    • During your site visit, you should collect information that is requested on the “AIT Site
        Visit Form” – use this form to take notes during your visit. Make sure your AIT Site Visit
        form is completed and signed. You will upload this to Canvas by the due date.
2. Service Learning Project (50 points) [1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 22]
You must complete at least 15 hours of fieldwork in a setting in which you have contact with
students or other individuals with disabilities. In most settings, you will provide tutoring and/or
mentoring to one or more individuals with disabilities; however, it is possible that you may
perform other activities depending on your setting.
    • There are 4 assignments related to your Service Learning Project.
            o Service Learning Agreement (5 points) – You are responsible for selecting a
                volunteer placement to complete your 15 hours of volunteer work throughout the
                semester. You may choose any placement from the approved site list (posted on
                Canvas). If you prefer to do your volunteer work somewhere else, you need to
                preapprove your site with us. Once you have selected your placement, you must
                get the supervisor at your host organization to confirm your placement. For
                liability reasons, you cannot begin your site visits until this assignment is turned
                in. You may use the official Service Learning Agreement form (on Canvas), but
                we will also accept screenshots of an email or other correspondence confirming
                the site agrees to have you complete your placement there.
            o Service Hour Log (5 points) – You must maintain a log including the dates, a
                brief description of tasks performed on a given date, and the number of hours
                performed on that date. After you have completed your 15 hours, your supervisor
                must sign this form, and then you will submit this on Canvas.
            o SLP Discussion Boards (4 discussion boards x 5 points each = 20 points) – At
                4 times during the semester, you will be broken into groups to participate in group
                discussion boards. This will be your chance to share your experiences, highs/lows,
                questions, etc. with your classmates and also get insight from other placements
                your classmates chose for their site. Detailed instructions will be provided on
                Canvas.
            o SLP Reflective Journal (20 points) – You will be required to write a reflective
                journal paper that details your experiences at your SLP placement. The prompts
                for this will be included on Canvas in a rubric. You may submit this as soon as
                you complete your hours, but you have until the end of the semester to complete


                 your journal. It’s highly recommended you take notes on your experience or write
                 parts of the reflective journal throughout the semester.
3. In-class activities (ICAs) (20 ICA’s x 5 points each = 100 points)
During the class sessions, you will provide reflections and reactions to various videos, guest
speakers, or other material presented in class. You will turn in your handwritten notes or Canvas
entries TWICE during the class period: typically, these will be once at the beginning (worth 2.5
points) and once at the end of the class period (worth 2.5 points) for a total of 5 participation
points for the day. Thus, if you arrive late or need to leave early on a given class day, you would
still be eligible to earn half the points for the portion of class you did attend. Your submissions
should include both your name and your UT EID to indicate that it is your work. It is your
responsibility to ensure we have your completed in-class activity sheets and turn them in when
asked. No ICA sheets will be accepted after we have collected the group’s responses at the
beginning of class or after exiting class at the end. You must be present in class to receive points
for these activities. You can check Canvas to monitor your progress throughout the semester.
Under no circumstances should a student turn-in the work of another student (as if they
were in class). This is considered academic dishonesty and can result in an F in the class
and dismissal from the university for both students (i.e., the student who turned in the
work of another student when they were absent and the student who was absent requesting
for their peer to turn in their work for them).
4. Mini Projects (2 projects x 15 points each = 30 points)
At two times throughout the semester you will be assigned a brief mini project to complete.
These will include applying knowledge from class in a practical manner. You will complete the
projects following the specific rubrics for each project outlined on Canvas.
5. In-Class Tests (20 points each X 4 = 80 pts total)
You will take four in-class multiple choice exams at different time points in the semester to
assess your individual knowledge across the chapter content in the Hallahan et al. textbook or
other assigned course readings and class lectures. These will be individual tests, however you
will be allowed to use your book and notes for the test. Tests will be in class but completed on
Canvas. If you prefer paper tests, you will need to let us know ahead of time so we can have a
copy printed for you.
6. Adapted Lesson Plan Project (25 pts total)
This is a take home project you will complete individually. This project will include various
assessment components. You will (a) reflect on/write about your own family systems, (b) write
your own teaching philosophy; (c) locate/list and briefly describe resources in your area of
teaching or your major area, and (d) finally, you will create a case study around a student with a
disability in which you will adapt a lesson plan for this target student.
Bonus Points (15 points)
You will have opportunities for up to 15 bonus points throughout the semester. You will have up
to 9 bonus points for the first 3 classes (3 pts per class for attendance), 3 points for your “About
You” document, and 6 points for coming to the second to last class day (4/30) and completing in-
class bonus activities.


  Assignment / Requirement                                    Due Date             Point Value
  1. Assistive Technology Site Visit              Sign up opens 9/12
                                                  AIT Site Visit Form – Due 5/3         15
  2. Service Learning Project                     Service Learning Agreement –
                                                  Due 2/21
                                                  SLP Discussion Boards – Due
                                                  2/5, 2/26, 3/28, 4/30                 50
                                                  SLP Hour Log & SLP
                                                  Reflective Journal – Due 5/7
  3. In class activities (20 class periods x 5    In-class; half the points at the
       points each)                               beginning of class and half the      100
                                                  points at the end of class; no
                                                  make-ups
  4. Mini Projects (2 projects x 15 points        Mini Project 1 – Due 3/5
       each)                                      Mini Project 2 – Due 4/23             30
  5. In-Class Tests                               Test 1 – 2/14
       (4 tests x 20 points each)                 Test 2 – 3/7                          80
                                                  Test 3 – 4/9
                                                  Test 4 – 5/2
  6. Adapted Lesson Plan Project                  Due 5/7                               25
  Total Points                                                                         300
                                                  Class attendance – 1/22, 1/24,        15
                                                  and 1/29 (3 pts each)
  Bonus Points
                                                  About You document – 1/24 (3
                                                  pts)
                                                  Class attendance – 4/30 (6 pts)
Grades
+/- grades will not be used; grades will be assigned in the following manner:
A = 300 - 269 points
B = 268 - 239
C = 238 - 209
D = 208- 179
F = 178 or below
How to Determine Your Grade
Simply add all of the points in Canvas you have earned and compare the total to the grading
criteria above. Remember to add in your bonus points if you have earned any in adding up your
grade.
Course Feedback


 Feedback is an important part of any kind of learning. Without feedback on how well students
 understand the material, it is more difficult for students to make significant progress. In this
 course each of you may give me feedback on your learning in informal and formal ways, such as
 during assignments, in class activities, and class discussions. Always feel free to write in your
 ICA entries any feedback/suggestions. I want you to let me know when something we discuss is
 not clear. This kind of communication will enable me to provide additional information when
 needed or to explain a concept in different terms.
 It is the policy of the College of Education that all organized courses be evaluated using a Course
 Instructor Survey arranged through the Measurement and Evaluation Center at the end of the
 semester. You will be given this course evaluation during the last week of the course. Student
 evaluations remain anonymous; the instructor will not be present during the evaluation and will
 not see the answer sheets until grades have been officially reported.
                                 III. Tentative Course Schedule
            (The times of delivery & emphasis of course content are subject to change)
Date               Main Topic                                    Assignments and Readings
Session 1:         Overview of Disability & Special              All page numbers for chapter readings
January 22         Education                                     refer to the loose-leaf text version.
                   Introduction and Overview of Course
                                                                 Bonus ICA (3 pts)
Session 2:         History of Disability                         Readings to be Completed by class day:
January 24         Guest speakers for SLP                        Textbook Ch. 1
                                                                 About You document Due (3 Bonus
                                                                 pts)
                                                                 Bonus ICA (3 pts)
                                                                 AIT sign-up opens TOMORROW; log
                                                                 onto Canvas to access calendar sign-up.
                                                                 See instructions on Canvas in AIT
                                                                 document folder.
Session 3:         Evaluation, Placements, & Inclusion           Readings to be Completed by class day:
January 29         Guest speakers for SLP                        Textbook Ch. 2 pg.’s 20-34
                                                                 Bonus ICA (3 pts)
Session 4:         SPED Law & Current Practices &                Readings to be Completed by class day:
January 31         Roles of Educators                            Textbook Ch. 2 pg.’s 34-45
Session 5:         Early Childhood                               Readings to be Completed:
February 5                                                       Readings posted to Canvas
                                                                 SLP Discussion Board 1 Due
Session 6:         Adulthood                                     Readings to be Completed:
February 7                                                       Readings posted to Canvas


Session 7:  Multicultural & Bilingual Special       Readings to be Completed:
February 12 Education                               Textbook Ch. 3
Session 8:  Test #1
February 14 Test covers readings and class lectures
            from 1/22 – 2/12
Session 9:  Working with Parents & Families         Readings to be Completed:
February 19                                         Textbook Ch. 4
Session 10: Classroom Strategies                    Readings to be Completed:
February 21
                                                    Service Learning Agreement Due
Session 11: 1:1 or Small Group Strategies           Readings to be Completed:
February 26                                         Readings posted to Canvas
                                                    SLP Discussion Board 2 Due
Session 12: Challenging Behavior                    Readings to be Completed:
February 28                                         Readings posted to Canvas
Session 13: Intellectual Disability                 Readings to be Completed:
March 5                                             Textbook Ch. 5
                                                    Mini Project 1 Due
Session 14: Test #2
March 7     Test covers readings and class lectures
            from 2/19 – 3/5
Session 15: Learning Disability                     Readings to be Completed:
March 12                                            Textbook Ch. 6
Session 16: ADHD                                    Readings to be Completed:
March 14                                            Textbook Ch. 7
March 19/21 SPRING BREAK – have fun!
Session 16: Emotional/Behavioral Disorders          Readings to be Completed:
March 26                                            Textbook Ch. 8
Session 17: Autism Spectrum Disorder                Readings to be Completed:
March 28                                            Textbook Ch. 9
                                                    SLP Discussion Board 3 Due


Session 18: Communication Disorders                 Readings to be Completed:
April 2                                             Textbook Ch. 10
Session 19: Deaf & Hearing Impairment               Readings to be Completed:
April 4                                             Textbook Ch. 11
Session 20: Test #3
April 9     Test covers readings and class lectures
            from 3/12 – 4/4
Session 21: Blind & Visual Impairment               Readings to be Completed:
April 11                                            Textbook Ch. 12 pg.’s 292 – 305
Session 22: Blind & Visual Impairment               Readings to be Completed:
April 16                                            Textbook Ch. 12 pg.’s 305 - 317
Session 23: Severe & Multiple Disabilities          Readings to be Completed:
April 18                                            Textbook Ch. 13
                                                    Adapted Lesson Plan Project available
                                                    on Canvas by 11:00am
Session 24: Physical Disability & Other Health      Readings to be Completed:
April 23    Impairment                              Textbook Ch. 14
                                                    Mini Project 2 Due
Session 25: Gifted & Talented                       Readings to be Completed:
April 25                                            Textbook Ch. 15
Session 26: Review & Bonus Day                      Bonus ICA (6 pts)
April 30
                                                    SLP Discussion Board 4 Due
Session 27: Test #4                                 AIT Lab Visit Form Due tomorrow
May 2       Test covers readings and class lectures (5/3)
            from 4/11 – 4/25
Session 28:                                         Adapted Lesson Plan Project Due
May 7       NO CLASS – Projects due                 SLP Reflective Journal Due
                                                    SLP Service Hour Log Due
Finals Week NO CLASS                                Have a safe and enjoyable summer
            Good luck everyone!                     break!
