Sangeeta Kamdar, Ph.D, Au.D, CCC-A

Email: sangeeta.kamdar@austin.utexas.edu

EDUCATION
University of Texas at Austin, Doctor of Philosophy
= December 2018
University of Texas at Austin, Doctor of Audiology
= December 2010
University of Texas at Austin, Bachelor of Science in Communication Sciences and Disorders

" May 2007
| WORK EXPERIENCE
University of Texas @ Austin, Austin, TX January 2019 — present

Clinical Assistant Professor
= Teaching and mentoring students enrolled in the Doctor of Audiology (AuD) program, assisting with coordination of
clinical practicum placements for AuD students.

= Supervising 1*t year AUD students during preschool speech, language, and hearing screening in the community.
p gly

University of Texas @ Austin, Austin, TX August 2016 — December 2018
Lecturer
= Principles of Audiology. Course offers an introduction into the field of Audiology. Topics covered include the basic
principles of sound, the behavioral diagnostic audiometric test battery, acoustic immitance testing, objective measures of
hearing status, general disorders and diseases of the auditory system and counseling and treatment strategies.

= Principles of Aural Rehabilitation. Course offers an introduction into the principles of amplification, including hearing aid
components, personal and group amplification systems, troubleshooting techniques, cochlear implants, assistive listening
devices and sound field acoustics.

= Clinical Audiology. Course offers detailed information into the field of Audiology. Topics include the basic audiometric
test battery along with special testing, disorders, counseling and management of auditory disorders.

= Hearing Science. Course offers detailed information into acoustical, physiological, and psychological bases of normal
human hearing; theories of audition; laboratory techniques in hearing science research.

Austin ENT Clinic, Austin, TX January 2011 — September 2016
Audiologist
= Administer adult and pediatric diagnostic hearing evaluations

= Evaluate vestibular function with electronystagmus (ENG), vestibular auto rotation test (VAT) and sensory
organizational testing (SOT)

= Assist patients in managing aspects of hearing loss. Duties included: hearing aid/bone anchored hearing aid evaluations,
selection and fitting of amplification devices in addition to follow-up care

University of Texas @ Austin, Austin, TX Spring 2010 — Spring 2016
Assistant Instructor
= Taught courses in Principles of Audiology and Clinical Audiology. Topics covered include: the basic principles of sound,
the behavioral diagnostic audiometric test battery, acoustic immitance testing, objective measures of hearing status, general
disorders and diseases of the auditory system, counseling and treatment strategies along with special testing, disorders,
counseling and management of auditory disorders.

| RESEARCH & PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

= Kamdar, Sangeeta & Jin, Su-Hyun. (2013). The medial olivary complex reflex strength of children with auditory processing
disorders. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 133. 3424.=" Kamdar, Sangeeta & Liu, Chang & Jin, Su-Hyun & Gonzales, Dasia. (2010). Intelligibility of accented American English isolated
vowel: Effects of fundamental frequency (FO) contour and formant structures. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America. 127. 1903.

= Liu, Chang & Jin, Su-Hyun & Kamdar, Sangeeta. (2009). Consonant intelligibility of English-, Chinese-, and Korean-native talkers.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 126. 2313.

= Jin, Su-Hyun & Liu, Chang & Kamdar, Sangeeta. (2009). Cross language effects on vowel perception in noise: Detection of English
vowels spoken by English, Chinese, and Korean talkers.. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 126.

= Jin, Su-Hyun & Liu, Chang & Kamdar, Sangeeta. (2009). Acoustic features and intelligibility of American-English vowels for
English, Chinese, and Korean talkers. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 125. 2728.

= Liu, Chang & Kamdar, Sangeeta. (2008). Acoustic features of American-English vowels for English, Chinese, and Korean talkers..
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 124. 2557.

Kuhn Scholar August 2016
Scout Haug Outstanding Student in Audiology Award May 2009
American Speech Language and Hearing Association January 2012 — present