BIM MODELING/REPRESENTA TION ARC s327R/s386M /LAR $388 1

Insttuc tor:

Marna Smith marasmith@utexas.edu
Office Hours: TU, TH 11:30-12:30 GOL 2.206

 

Hannah Griffiths $2017 Ann Staniford F2018 Allie Alford F2018 Kenneth Sneed $2018

https://roundme.com/tour/325414/view/1071959/ https://roundme.com/tour/333810/view/1108520/
Prerequisites:

Desc niption:

Hardware:

Software:

Restricted to Architecture and Engineenng students. Open to other majors with instructors
consent.

In this class you will explore the creation, iteration, representation and visualization of Building
Information Models with the option of utilizing vanous software platforms and representation
methods including: Revit, Dynamo, Enscape3D, RoundMe, Video Editing and digital presentation
tools. You will be representing your project through digital presentations including rendenng,
panoramas, video and virtual reality walk through. The class will use vanous modeling and
presentations programs with a focuson BIM Modeling in Revit and representation through
Enscape3D.

Week 1: Introduction to BIM Modeling techniques using Revit. We willbe covenng site creation,
system families, and best modeling practices. This model will be the base for further explorations.
We will be using Enscape3D to evaluate the project in real time as well as produce rendenngs
and panoramaswhiile utilizing vanous presentation modes.

Week 2: Parametnc form and component creation. Creation of parametnc formsand surfaces
used to produce divided curvesand surfaces. Creation of adaptive components and iteration
over divided curvesand surfaces. We willbe covernng Panoramasin both Enscape3D and Revit,
video creation in Enscape3D and explonng digital and immersive presentation options.

Week 3: Continue to develop model, form and components. Peer review of projects using the
HTC Vive to make presentation and design decisions. Introduction to Dynamo.

Week 4: Final iteration/development of models, graphs, and presentation techniques. Digital
presentation strategy should be finalized during thisweek. Video Creation and editing.

Week 5: Production and evaluation of final presentations.

You should have a laptop capable of running at the minimum Revit 2019 and if possible
Enscape3bD.
You should acquire a Google Cardboard or similar for Panorama viewing.

Download and install the lab versions of Revit and Enscape3D on to yourown computer. Sgn up
fora RoundMe account These programsare available from Autodesk and Enscape3D to
students at no charge. We may use Rhino and or Grasshopperon a limited basisand they are
not required.BIM MODELING/REPRESENTA TION ARC s327R/s386M /LAR $388 2

Evaluation:

Attendance:

Progress:

Assignments:

Grades:

Two unexcused absenceswill result in the lowenng of yourgrade by one letter.
Three unexcused absenceswill result ina grade no higherthan a C and my recommendation
that you drop the course. Five unexcused absences =F.

Use mobile phones for classrelated assignments. If you need to use your phone fornon-class
related reasons, inform the teacher beforehand and leave the room.

Work on classrelated assignments dunng class. Complete other non-class related items outside
of class.

Everyone isstarting out at differing levels of proficiency therefore your grade will be based on
relative progress.

There will be two projects. You should complete the projects by the beginning of classon the
due date.

X Excused Incomplete - Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family
emergency. Simply not completing work on time isnot an adequate cause for assigning
this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans offices
and with an agreement asto a new completion date. Work must be completed before
the second week of the next semester in which you are enrolling, according to the
School of Architecture policy.

F Fail - Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance isnot
acceptable. Note that this grade willbe assigned when you have excessive unexc used
absences.

C-,D  Poor- Project isincomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of
presentation are not levelLappropnate. Student does not demonstrate the required
competence and knowledge base.

C+HC Average - Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in classand not
pursued with dedication and ngor. Project isincomplete in one or more areas.

B-/B/B+Above Average - Project isthorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully
completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in classand puts in effort
to resolve required projects. Project iscomplete on all levelsand demonstrates potential
forexcellence.

A/A- Excellent - Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropnateness,
visual language, conceptual ngor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues
concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project Is
complete on all levels.BIM MODELING/REPRESENTA TION ARC s327R/s386M /LAR $388 3

Resources:

Linked In Leaming https://www.linkedin.com/leaming/me?u=36306084
Video Tutonals included in assignments

Autodesk Design Academy, https://academy.autodesk.com/software/revit

Accommodations:

At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special accommodations
should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with
Disabilities Office. To ensure that the most appropnate accommodationscan be provided,
students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY.

Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:

Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty hams the individual, all students, and the integnity of the University, policieson
scholastic dishonesty will be stnctly enforced.

 

Feric Fevolution 290 Mulberry, New York, ShOP Architects