BlO206L

INTRODUCTORY LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS IN BIOLOGY
Summer 2020

Course Description

 

This course has been designed to engage you, excite you, and get you thinking like a scientist! You will generate
hypotheses, design experiments, and collect and analyze data. This is a Survey course, and we will cover a variety of
biological topics and concepts. We'll begin at the molecular level and examine biomolecules like enzymes and nucleic
acids. We'll then step up to the next level of organization and study cell structure and function. The next section of the
course focuses on two physiological processes: cell respiration and photosynthesis. We will end of the semester with two
of my favorite fields of study- ecology and evolution. Over the course of the semester you will work with your fellow
students during lab to complete Lab Simulations and discuss ethical issues. You will also complete Home Activities to
further explore topics that interest you. At the end of the semester, we hope you are as amazed as we are by the great

diversity of life and have a deeper appreciation for the process of science.

This course carries the Ethics Flag. Ethics courses, like BIO 206L, are designed to equip you with skills that are
necessary for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. A substantial portion of your grade (50%) comes

from assignments involving ethical issues and the process of applying ethical reasoning to real-life situations.

BlO206L consists of a range of unique numbers (beginning with 84282). Each unique number corresponds to a specific
laboratory time (via Zoom). Scheduled times of all BIO206L lab sections are listed in the Summer 2020 Course Schedule

online: http://registrar.utexas.edu/schedules/

 

Required materials

 

Lab Simulations

You must purchase access to Lab Simulations for BIO 206L from Hayden-McNeil. See Canvas for instructions.

Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu/)

 

| will use Canvas to share slides, articles, activities, AND to send and receive emails, AND to post important
announcements. Please check Canvas daily for course information. Canvas will serve as the official repository of the
BIO 206L scores that will comprise your total BIO206L final grade. It is your responsibility to ensure that your scores for
all of the various BIO 206L assignments are correctly displayed in Canvas. AFTER A GRADE APPEARS IN CANVAS
YOU HAVE 48 HOURS TO ASK FOR A REGRADE.

Course Personnel

 

Lecturer: Dr. Martha Maas
Office hours: Mondays and Fridays from 11-12:30 through Zoom. Or by appointment.

Email: m.maas @ austin.utexas.edu

 

BIO 206L Summer 2020 Page 1 of 8Laboratory Instructors (LI’s)

 

Your LI will Supervise your work during each Zoom laboratory session. Your LI should be your first point of contact for
individual assistance during the course. Your LI will be available to assist you during regularly scheduled office hours or

by appointment. Your LI will provide a handout with more details including his/her office hours this week in Canvas.

Undergraduate Laboratory Assistants (UGLA’s)

 

Your lab section has also been assigned an UGLA. Your UGLA is a former BIO 206L student. Their role is to guide you
as you complete the simulations with your lab group and also ‘prod’ you (if needed) to thoroughly discuss ethical issues.

and will also will supervise your work during each Zoom laboratory session.

Course Structure

 

1. Lecture Questions

Lectures will be held on Mondays using Zoom and will consist of activities and mini-lectures to introduce you to the week’s
concepts and the ethical issues. Lecture materials (handouts, slides, etc.) will be posted on Canvas. During lecture, | will
pose Lecture Questions to help you assess your own understanding of the material. Starting on Monday, June 8th, | will
begin to record your answers. Lecture questions will be asked using UT Instapoll. You will access UT Instapoll through
Canvas. You can earn up to 50 participation points by attending Zoom lecture sessions and answering questions. You

cannot make up Lecture Questions.

2. Laboratory Performance

Labs will be held during your scheduled time using Zoom. The Course Schedule (page 6) lists the 10 Lab Simulations and
Ethics Topics that will be covered during lab. During the Zoom lab sessions, you will be assigned to work with a group of
several students (typically 4) to complete Lab Simulations and discuss ethical issues. For each laboratory Zoom session,
you can earn up to 5 points for ‘Lab Performance’ for arriving on-time to the Zoom lab session, participating in the Lab
Simulations, and contributing to the discussion of the ethical issue. There will be ten Zoom lab sessions, for a total of 50

points possible for Lab Performance. Once your Laboratory Performance grade is posted in Canvas, you have 48 hours

 

to speak with your LI about a grading concern. After 48 hours, your performance grade will not be reviewed or adjusted.

 

You cannot make-up a Lab Performance grade.

3. Lab Review Questions

You will answer a series of multiple choice and short answer questions about Lab Simulations and Ethical Issues in
Canvas. These questions will ask you to share your hypotheses, data, observations, and discuss the results of the
activity. Review Questions will be due each Friday (Starting Friday, June 12"") before midnight and are worth 10 points

each (for a total of 100 points possible). You cannot make-up Lab Simulation Review Questions.

Your LI will grade your Lab Review Questions using Speed Grader on Canvas. Once your Lab Review Questions are
posted in Canvas, you have 48 hours to speak with your LI about a grading concern. After 48 hours, your grade will not

be reviewed or adjusted. You cannot make-up Lab Review Questions.

 

BIO 206L Summer 2020 Page 2 of 84. Ethics Case Studies

You will complete four Ethics Case Studies. See Canvas for due dates. You can earn up to 10 points for each Ethics
Case Study assignment, for a total of 40 points (NO CREDIT FOR LATE ASSIGNMENTS.). Each Ethics Case Study
assignment will be posted on Canvas. You will submit a Word Document of your Ethics Case Study assignment on
Canvas. Any Ethics Case Study assignments turned in late will not be accepted for grading, and a "0" grade will be

recorded for that case study.

Your LI will grade your Ethics Case Study assignment using Speed Grader on Canvas. Once your Ethics Case Study
assignment is graded, you have 48 hours to speak with your LI about a grading concern. After 48 hours, your grade will
not be reviewed or adjusted. Any Ethics Case Study assignments turned in late will not be accepted for grading, anda

"O" grade will be recorded for that report.

5. Home Activities

We’ve designed Home Activities for you to complete... at home! These activities ask you to explore scientific questions
using affordable (or free!) materials you can find at your local grocery or home improvement store. You will complete
FOUR of the 10 Home Activities. Each Home Activity is worth 15 points so you can earn up to 60 points for completing
four Home Activities. The first Home Activity, ‘Experimental Design’, is REQUIRED and asks you to design and conduct
an experiment and record your data and observations. The instructions for the Experimental Design Home Activity are
posted on Canvas. You must submit this assignment by Friday, July 3" before midnight. The table below shows the due

dates for the Home Activities. You must complete

Home Activity One: Experimental Design Friday, July 3" before midnight.

Home Activity Two: Enzyme Activity
Complete ONE of these activities by
Home Activity Three: Biomolecules

Home Activity Four: DNA

Friday, July 17" before midnight.

Home Activity Five: Nervous System

Complete ONE of these activities by
Home Activity Six: Bacterial growth ,
Friday, July 31° before midnight.
Home Activity Seven: Yeast metabolism

Home Activity Eight: iNaturalist

Complete ONE of these activities by
Home Activity Nine: Animal Dissection th
Friday, August 14° before midnight.
Home Activity Ten: Animal Behavior Observation

 

BIO 206L Summer 2020 Page3 of 86. Concept Exam
On Monday, August 17" you have from 9 a.m. until 11:59 p.m. to answer 50 multiple-choice and short answer questions
about the concepts, techniques, and ethical issues presented in lecture and lab. Each question will be worth two points

each (for a total of 100 points possible).

7. Extra Credit

| Know life happens. You may have to miss a lecture or lab for personal reasons. | do NOT let students ‘make-up’ Lecture
Questions, Lab Performance grades, Lab Review Questions, or Ethics Activities. BUT you can earn 15 points of Extra
Credit (WOW!) by completing one EXTRA Home Activity (a fifth one). You must complete and submit the EXTRA Home
Activity by Friday, August 14" before midnight.

Grading Summary

 

Your grade in BIO206L will be determined as follows:

Lecture Questions Questions answered (participation) 50
Lab Performance Five points each (10 Labs) 50
Lab Review Questions (10 points each) 10 points each (10 labs) 100
Ethics Case Studies (10 points each) Four Ethics Case Studies 40
Home Activities (15 points each) Four Home Activities 60
Concept Exam 50 questions (2 points each) 100
TOTAL POINTS POSSIBLE: 400

This gives a total of 400 possible points. The course grade will be computed by dividing the sum of all points earned by 4
to obtain a score based upon a 100 point scale. If your score falls within one of the categories listed below, you are
guaranteed the letter grade indicated. In this course your final course grade will be one of the following:

93-100 points = A, 90-92.99 points = A-, 87-89.99 points = B+, 83-86.99 points = B, 80-82.99 points = B-,

77-79.99 points = C+, 73-76.99 points = C, 70-72.99 points = C-, 67-69.99 points = D+, 63-66.99 = D, 60-62.99 = D-
below 60 points = F.

All scores that will comprise the total final grade will be posted in Canvas. All student grades will be available for

individual inspection on LabClicker and Canvas using your UT EID. This means YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE to review and

confirm within 48 hours that your assignments have been graded correctly.

BIO 206L Summer 2020 Page 4 of 8IMPORTANT Policies

Policy on academic integrity (Honor Code):

 

You are expected to maintain academic integrity. The University of Texas at Austin Honor Code states: “The core
values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness,

and respect toward peers and community.”

All assignments must be your OWN work. All submitted assignments will be checked for evidence of cheating. When
cheating is suspected, we will act in accordance with the University’s honor code policies. If you become aware of the
scholastic dishonesty of a fellow student, you are obligated by the University Honor Code to report it. Students who
violate the University’s policies on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure

in the course and/or dismissal from the University. To see the UT academic dishonesty policy, please see:

http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_conseq.php

 

Policy on Religious Observance
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of
a religious holy day. If you must miss a lecture or lab or an examination in order to observe a religious holy day, you will

be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.

Students with Disabilities

Specialized services are available through Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). Typically you must provide
documentation to the Dean of Students’ Office, such that appropriate accommodations can be determined. If deemed that
special accommodations may be made, the SSD office should provide you with a letter which you should submit to Dr.

Maas (by the 12th class day or as soon as the official accommodation request letter is obtained).

BIO 206L Summer 2020 Page 5 of 8Summer 2020 COURSE SCHEDULE: LECTURE AND LABS BEGIN THE WEEK OF JUNE 8TH

 

August 17 On Monday, August 17". Concept Exam Questions on Canvas open from 9 a.m. until 11:59 p.m.

 

BIO 206L Summer 2020 Page 6 of 8