NTR 312: Intro to Nutritional Science
Summer 2019 Unique #85090
MTWTH 10:00-12:00

Instructor: Ms. Drew Hays MA, RD, LD

Email: drew.hays@austin.utexas.edu

Phone: 512-471-2800

Office Hours: Wednesday 12:00-1:00 or by appointment

TA: Lavender Hackman
Email: lavenderhackman@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesday 12:00-1:00 or by appointment

Required Corse Materials:

Text:

Whitney, EN, Rolfes SR. Understanding Nutrition, 15" edition
Available for purchase at the CoOp, and rental or purchase at:

 

Zoom Version 5.0

Class will be conducted remotely via Zoom Monday-Thursday from 10:00-12:00. This is
not a self-paced online course. Students should plan on attending all lectures. The latest
version of Zoom is required to access the live lectures.

Course Description

Intro to Nutritional Science provides an overview of the science of nutrition. It is an
introductory course that covers food and its relationship to health, development, and
disease. Topics covered include components of food (carbohydrates, fats, proteins,
vitamins and minerals), their digestion, absorption, transport, and metabolism, their
sources in foods, effects of deficiency or excess, and the biological roles they play in the
body. Students learn the vital role of scientific inquiry in addressing currently pressing
problems such as the growing epidemic of obesity and chronic illnesses, including diabetes,
coronary heart disease, and cancer. Other nutrition-related conditions, such as eating
disorders and osteoporosis are also covered. This course conveys knowledge and skills that
are relevant and applicable to students’ lives, now and in the future.

The content of this course will be communicated by lecture, assigned readings, videos,
projects, activities, and group discussion. In addition, the instructor engages the class in
discussions of current theories and empirical research in nutrition, and answers questions
raised by students.

Quantitative methods are widely used in a variety of contexts. Students will learn formulas
for determining major constructs in nutrition such as body mass index, basal metabolic
rate, and total energy needs. Students will become familiar with making calculations
related to nutrient proportions in their diet and in the foods they eat.Learning outcomes:

e Demonstrate fundamental nutrition knowledge related to macronutrients,
micronutrients, digestion and absorption, nutrient function, dietary recommendations,
food composition, and nutritional health.

e Apply basic dietary principles of adequacy, balance, variety and moderation in planning
healthy menus.

e Critically evaluate food and nutrition information in the popular media and scientific
literature.

e Assess an individual's nutritional status and make recommendations to improve dietary
habits and promote health.

Course Policies and Procedures
Canvas: http://canvas.utexas.edu/
e Syllabus, announcements, assignments, and supplemental information will be
posted on Canvas. Canvas should be checked regularly for course updates.
e Grades will be posted in Canvas
o Due to policies concerning the Family Education Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA), information about grades cannot be emailed.
© Questions regarding grades should be addressed in live call sessions with
instructor or TA.

Behavior

During Zoom class sessions, please keep your microphone muted. If you have a question
you may use the chat box function or use ‘hand raise’ icon within zoom. I am happy to
answer questions during lecture, and appreciate your input and thoughts and engaging
discussion. Persistent distracting or disrespectful behavior will lead to dismissal from the
course and referral to the Office of the Dean of Students for counseling.

Grades
Grading Scale: Final grades are based on 500 total points. Final point assignments
will be rounded to the nearest whole number.

e Quizzes (6 @ 50 points each) = 300 points

e Midterm and Final Exam 50 points each) = 100 points

e Dietary analysis project = 50 points
Class Activities /Discussions = 50 points

Total = 500 points

Quizzes: There will be 6 total quizzes (50 points each) throughout the semester,
administered via canvas.
e Quizzes will be available on Canvas from 12:01am to 11:59pm on their scheduled
day. They will be closed thereafter.
You will be allowed 1- 45 minute attempt at each quiz.
e No make-up or early quizzes will be offered.
e You are expected to work alone on the quizzes; notes and books are allowed.
e Quiz responses may be reviewed in office hours or other appointment with the TA
in office hours for 3 DAYS ONLY following the close of the quiz.
e Quizzes may not be preserved in any way; multiple windows are not allowed. See
academic integrity section for penalties should this policy be broken.Midterm and Final Exams: Comprehensive midterm and final exams (50 points each) will
be administered via Canvas. These exams will be available for the days scheduled from
12:01 am to 11:59pm, and closed thereafter. You will have 45 minutes to complete the
exams. Material will be presented in a case study format. Students will apply their
knowledge to ‘real life’ scenarios via multiple choice questions. Once you have begun the
exam, you may not stop or pause the timer.

e Exams will be available for review for 3 DAYS ONLY in office hours, or by

appointment following the grade posting on canvas.

Attendance/ Activities: Attendance to all live Zoom sessions is expected. There will be
several interactive activities throughout the semester during the live sessions. These may
be announced, or unannounced, and responses will be recorded via Zoom poll. Students
may only participate in Zoom polling when present live in the class session. No make-up
quizzes /exams/assignments will be provided, no exceptions. If you are late to class, or not
logged in during polls, no points will be recorded.

Extra Credit: There will be several unannounced pop quizzes administered via Zoom
polling throughout the semester. Students must be logged onto the live class Zoom session
to participate and receive credit. No makeups of extra credit points will be offered
whatsoever. Additional extra credit activities may include discussion boards or experiential
activities to be announced as they are available. These opportunities will be open fora
limited time and will close at a specified date and time. They will not reopen thereafter and
no makeups will be offered, no exceptions. All extra credit points will be added to the
course point total. Extra credit points are offered to offset losses of points for any reason
making makeups of any assignment, quiz, or activity unnecessary.

Final grade calculation

A 450-500 points C 375-399 points F 0-339 points
B 400-449 points D 350-374 points

NO GIFT POINTS WILL BE GIVEN AT THE END OF THE SEMESTER FOR ‘BORDERLINE’
GRADES. There are many opportunities to earn extra points throughout the semester.
It is the student's responsibility to be proactive in earning these points.

Late policies for assignments: No late submissions of any kind will be accepted, no
exceptions. Quizzes will not reopen after the close date for any reason. No make-up exams
will be offered. Students must be present in live Zoom class sessions to participate in
discussion and extra credit activities.

Dietary Analysis Project: The purpose of this exercise is to provide students with
experience in collecting and analyzing data, as well as provide useful information about
your own nutrient intake. Each student will keep a food diary for 3 days and then run a
quantitative analysis of his/her diet for a variety of nutrients. Results of the 3-day dietary
analysis will be compared to established guidelines to assess the adequacy of the student's
diet in providing the necessary macro- and micro-ingredients to support good health.
Based on this assessment, students will determine changes that could be made to achieve a
healthier diet, including which food options (and in what amount) would remedy
deficiencies, and which foods should be reduced or eliminated.Class Attendance and Preparation:

Attendance to live Zoom sessions is expected and essential to success in the course.
Lecture slides will be posted on canvas but WILL NOT include everything discussed in
class. You are expected to complete the reading BEFORE each class period. A portion of
your extra credit quiz points will be attendance. Assignments and exams will include some
material that is presented in class and is not covered in the text. Daily class attendance and
participation will assure the maximum possible points in the course. Point loss will result
from nonattendance; these points cannot be recuperated.

Email Correspondence

Email is a convenient tool but should be used sparingly and appropriately for
correspondence with your instructor and TA. Office hours are for discussing grades, course
content etc. Should you have questions, or need help regarding any course material, office
hours or a separate appointment are the only appropriate platforms for these discussions.
The instructor and TA will disregard unprofessional or inappropriate emails or canvas
messages.

Academic Integrity: Honesty and integrity must be practiced in all class activities.
Cheating will not be tolerated. Violations of University rules on academic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties including possible failure of the course and dismissal from
the University. The Students for Judicial Services site has important information regarding
academic integrity and standards of conduct. Students are expected to read, fully
understand, and abide by this content.

http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/

The least severe penalty for scholastic dishonesty will be a grade of F. ALL instances
of scholastic dishonesty will be reported to the Dean’s office and will appear on your
official record.

No exam/quiz question, or assignment answer can be preserved through any means
whatsoever, including writing following the exam. Sharing exam questions, assignments,
lecture slides, or any other course material via e-mail, google doc, photographs, ‘academic
libraries’, course sharing websites, facebook (or other social media sites), or any other
internet means is strictly prohibited. Violations of these policies are considered scholastic
dishonesty and penalties outlined above will apply.

Zoom sessions and recordings may not be shared, copied, reproduced, in any way.
Violations of this policy will result is penalties described in the academic integrity section
as well as possible further legal action.

All assignments will be reviewed for plagiarism as well as wording consistencies with other
submissions from both current and previous semesters. Current software makes
plagiarism easily identifiable. Submit your own work, or face penalties for scholastic
dishonesty.

Religious Holy Day accommodations: By UT Austin policy, students must notify the
instructor of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a
religious holy day. Should an assignment be due on one of these days, it must be submitted
prior to your absence to avoid penalty for late submission.Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities

(512) 471-6259, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/