Mallary
Tenore

‘Larpley

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE

Lecturer, University of Texas at Austin, Moody College of
Communication

August 2019-Present | Teach a Journalism Practices course to public
relations majors. Work closely with students on finding story ideas,
writing journalistically, and understanding the basic tenets and ethics of

journalism.

Associate Director, Knight Center for Journalism in the Americas,

University of Texas at Austin

July 2017-Present (Promoted from Assistant Director in May 2019)

Dedicated leader with 12+ years of professional experience in media.
Adept at managing media organizations & teaching journalism.

@MallaryTenore + mallary.tenore@utexas.edu +» 512-471-1990

EDUCATION/ASSOCIATIONS

Duke University, Spring 2015: Certificate in Nonprofit
Management

Providence College, May 2007: Bachelor of Arts in Spanish
and English. Editor-in-chief of college newspaper, The Cowl

Member of Journalism and Women Symposium (JAWS),
2010-Present

Online News Association (ONA), 2018-Present | One of 15
media leaders selected to judge ONA's 2015 awards

* Oversee the Center's programs, including its online journalism courses,
which have reached nearly 200K people from 200 countries & territories.

- Plan the Center's annual International Symposium on Online Journalism
(ISOJ), which attracts 450 people from 40+ countries.

«Create and maintain the Center’s annual budget and manage finances.
- Write the Center's grant proposals and reports while maintaining

SKILLS

Teaching
Have taught at universities around the U.S, including
the University of Texas, the University of Missouri, the
University of South Florida, the University of Oregon and

relationships with funders and sponsors.

the University of North Carolina.

Social media

« Manage the Knight Center staff and the Center’s day-to-day operations.

Executive Director, Images & Voices of Hope (ivoh),
a media-related nonprofit

Dec. 2013-July 2017

« Expanded the organization's reach, developed new programs, and

significantly grew its online and social media presence.

« Developed a storytelling genre called Restorative Narrative, and created

ivoh’s Restorative Narrative Fellowship for media practitioners.

« Planned all of ivoh’s events, including an annual media summit and

regional media meetups.
« Responsible for fundraising and strategic planning.

« Managed ivoh staff and collaborated closely with ivoh’s trustees.

Project Researcher, Association of Independents in Radio
June 2016-January 2017 (Six-month contract position) | Conducted research
for the Association's Localore project, which pairs independent producers

Was one of the first people to teach journalists how to use
social media as a reporting and storytelling tool during in-
person seminars at The Poynter Institute. Have also taught
social media sessions for the U.S. Department of State, Case
Western Reserve University and the Chips Quinn Scholars
Program for Diversity in Journalism.

Freelance writing

Have written news stories and personal essays for a variety
of publications, including The Washington Post, The Dallas
Morning News, and the Tampa Bay Times. Write on a
volunteer basis for Austin Moms Blog.

Technical

Proficient in Google Analytics, WordPress, MailChimp,
Active Campaign, Salesforce, InDesign, Slack, Squarespace,
QuickBooks, and Photoshop.

with public radio & TV stations to tell innovative stories in under-covered

communities. Interviewed dozens of public radio journalists & wrote research

report identifying best practices.

Managing Editor, Poynter.org

June 2007-October 2013; St. Petersburg, Fla. (Started off as a reporter &
copy editor) | Oversaw publishing for Poynter.org, one of the world's leading
media news sites. Assigned, produced, line/copy edited and wrote stories for
the site while managing its social media accounts. Interacted on a daily basis
with journalists and heads of news organizations and became a sought-after

expert on news and information about the media industry.

AWARDS
Selected as the student “Most likely to become an Executive
Director” in Duke nonprofit management program (2015)

Named one of the top 50 female innovators in digital
journalism (2013)

Featured on a list of the top 100 Twitter accounts every
journalism student should follow (2013)

Named a Mirror Award finalist for outstanding media
reporting (2012)