ADVANCED STUDIO
ARC 696 /5461R
Instructor: Nichole Wiedemann

Email: wiedemann(dutexas.edu
Phone: 512-471-0736

 

Sophie Calle, Room 28 {left} Room 24 (right), 1981

INSIDE-OQUT

What is the architecture of a “one-night stay?”

PREREQUISITES Undergraduate: ARC 521E (formerly 520E) and ARC 5216 (formerly 520G) with a grade of at least C and satisfactory
completion of third-year portfolio review. Graduate: Satisfactory completion of Vertical Portfolio Review.

During the first summer session, this advanced studio will focus on the poetics of the habitual -
the frequent, the regular and the everyday- with a particular emphasis on the interior. We will
examine seemingly dialectical [and often biased) set of relationships, including temporary versus
permanent and interior versus exterior, to discover an architecture not exclusively founded on the
authority of form, space and/or permanence. We will seek an architecture of the temporary -
lasting for a limited time; passing; worldly- that, perhaps, embraces some modes of our current
existence.

In doing so, we will design from the INSIDE-OUT at two scales: the ROOM and the MOTEL.WORK

Dialogue, an exchange of ideas/positions (through talking and making}, will be at the core of our
daily activities. Not only will we seek engagement with those outside the school, as possible, the
‘horizontal’ structure of the studio will provide an open and supportive atmosphere. Like a lab,” the
studio is a Space for experimentation, observation and practice. It is a place of un-knowing.

ASSIGNMENTS

Assignment 1: OBSERVE_interior

Using your own home,” capture the manner in which we claim the space of the interior with an
emphasis on sleeping [or the bed], storing and bathing.

Assignment 2: ROOM 1_inside
Developing a program’ of inhabitation, design the interior a motel room allowing for territorializing.

Assignment 3: ROOM 1+ 2_out
Further articulate the relationship between INSIDE-OUT, with specific attention to light and air.

Assignment 4a: MOTEL_remote [teams suggested]
Using the roomls), assemble an “off the grid” motel, including water capture, located outside of
Terralingua, IX.

Assignment 4b: DELINEATE_precisely [teams suggested]

Describe precisely the design, from room to building, in orthographic projections (plan, ceiling
plan?, section, interior and exterior elevation] complimenting your experiential, or “within,”
drawings.

SCHEDULE* **

6/04-6/08 OBSERVE o%
6/08-6/15 ROOM 1 10%
6/15-6/22 ROOM 1+ 2 10%
6/22-6/29 MOTEL (w/delineate]
6/29-7/09 DELINEATE 20%
ENGAGEMENT_ attendance + participation o%

*The advanced studio, as described, is the first half of a full advanced studio. The schedule and grading constitutes 50% of the grade.
**If necessary, minor adjustments may be made to the schedule with advance notice.

LEARNING OUTCOMES_ Students have been exposed to the following learning objectives in
previous semesters. The level of expectation will continue to grow as students further develop
each competency. Some Issues would only be mentioned In passing in one studio but will be
studied In more depth In another.

e Design Composition Skills: Developed through three-dimensional architectural form and
space, both exterior and interior; building envelope
e Design Integration Skills: Demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of
materiality, structures, construction, and environmental system
2e Site Analysis and Design: Developed through the creative engagement with relevant
contextual; environmental and programmatic factors underlying the project

e §=Critical Thinking: Quality of conceptual and critical thought; learning from precedents;
research skills

e Graphic Skills: Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of
media strategy and level of skill displayed

e Collaborative and Leadership Skills: Demonstrated through the active engagement in all
activities of the studio

STUDIO CULTURE_ The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model.
Studio learning encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-
doing. The studio offers an environment where students can come together to ask questions and
make proposals, which are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting
professionals, and the public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction
from faculty members, and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical
thinking skills and spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of
education, where project-based learning becomes the foundation for developing an understanding
of and commitment to the school’s core values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity,
professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture's fundamental mission:
to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.

https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture

EVALUATION CRITERIA_ While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation,
a significant portion of each grade Is derived from broader and more subjective criteria. Student
work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject
to deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the
instructor.

Grading for an assignment Is broken into four components, each of which Is given roughly equal
weight:

Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.

e The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant
method of inquiry

e The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software,
sketch drawing and models, etc.] in the development of the design

e Initiative as demonstrated In work ethic - Does the student do what is asked; go
beyond what Is asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of
the design?

Grasp: the Ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge
introduced in companion courses.
e Astrong and clearly stated design objective
e Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan — including reasonable disposition of
programmatic elements - and sectional development
e Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as
demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures and
construction, structural and environmental system Integration, building materials and
assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design objective
e Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness,
floor plates, and assemblyResolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and
finesse in the final design presentation.

Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy
and level of skill displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design
process; technical documentation

Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group
discussions and reviews.

A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree
in the School of Architecture and to progress into the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not
satisfy degree requirements.

GRADE DESCRIPTIONS

A/A-

B+/B/B-

C+/C

C-/D+/D/D-

Excellent

Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual
language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues
concepts and techniques above and beyond what Is discussed In class. Project Is
complete on all levels.

Above Average

Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed.
Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to
resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates
potential for excellence.

Average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made In class and not
pursued with dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.

Poor

Project Is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of
presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required
competence and knowledge base.

Fail

Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance Is not
acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned when students have excessive
unexcused absences.

Excused Incomplete

Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not
completing work on time Is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It
may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an
agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed before the
second week of the next semester In which the student Is enrolling, according to the
School of Architecture policy.

ATTENDANCE_ Punctual and regular attendance Is mandatory. Participation is expected. With
three [3] unexcused absences, the student's final grade for the course will be lowered by a full
letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence
thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written

4documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing
work missed due to excused absences and Initiating communication with the instructor to
determine due dates.

If a student is late [5 minutes after the start of class] three (3] times, it will be counted as one (1]
unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence Is
known In advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences;
Asking a classmate to inform the Instructor Is not acceptable.

RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES_A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required
activities, Including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for
the purpose. A student whose absence Is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for
that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which
the student Is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires
students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that
arrangements can be made.

By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment,
or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete
the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.

ACADEMIC INTEGRITY_ Each student in the course Is expected to abide by the University of Texas
Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, | shall abide by the core values of
the University and uphold academic integrity.” Representing the work of others as your own,
including plagiarism, is taken very seriously at UT. You must cite your sources when you use the
words or Ideas of others; otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic
disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT's
Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web

address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php

Q DROP POLICY_ If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you ll need to execute a Q
drop before the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under
Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are In college at any public Texas institution.

For more information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.

PERSONAL PRONOUNS_ Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with
respect to Individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual
orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor
with the student's legal name, unless they have added a ‘preferred name” with the Gender and
Sexuality Center (http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/).
The instructor will gladly honor your request to address you by a name that Is different from what
appears on the official roster and by the gender pronouns you use [she/he/they/ze, etc]. Please
advise the instructor of any changes early in the semester so appropriate updates may be made to
their records.

MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES_ Taking care of your general well-being Is an
important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling
unmotivated, or anything else is getting In your way, there are options available for help:

e In-house CARE counselor (see below]

e For immediate supporto  Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center [CMHC]:
M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5" floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
o CMHC Crisis Line:
24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
e Free services at CMHC:
o Brief assessments and referral
services: https://cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html

CARE PROGRAM_ Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental
health professionals within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to
mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.

Abby Simpson [LCSW] is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and
staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please
leave a message If she Is unavailable by phone.

Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 [M-F 8am-5pm]
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE simpson.html

STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES_ This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds,
identities, and abilities. Instructors are committed to creating an effective learning environment
for all students, but this is possible only If you discuss your needs early. Any student with a
documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 {voice} or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone] as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information, visit

http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.

THE SANGER LEARNING CENTER_ All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Learning Center's classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer
academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses In 19 different subject areas. More than
20,000 students use the services at the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their
academic performance. For more information, please visit http://ugs.utexas.edu/slc or call 512-
471-3614 (JES A332].

UNDERGRADUATE WRITING CENTER_ http://uwc.utexas.edu

BEVOCAL_ BeVocal Is a university-wide Initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns
have the power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the
power to Intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build

a culture of care on campus, go to: https://wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal/.

BCAL_ Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants [TA], or
Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line [BCAL]: 512-232-5050. Calls can
be made anonymously. If something doesn't feel right, It probably isn't. Trust your instincts and
share your concerns.

FOOD PANTRY & CAREER CLOTHES CLOSET_ Student Emergency Services tn the Office of the
Dean of Students has launched UT Outpost (UA9 Building, 2609 University Ave; ring bell for
service] to support students on our campus that is equipped with a food pantry, and a career

6clothes closet to ensure every Longhorn has access to professional clothes for job and internship
interviews. Emergencies and financial hardships can interfere with student success beyond the
classroom, and this program will serve as an additional resource for students.

http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/utoutpost.php

TITLE IX REPORTING_ Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence
and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a
learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:

1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.

2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm

or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university's relevant policies:

https://titleix.utexas.edu/policies.

Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. Your instructor is a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX
related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.

Before talking with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask
whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or
remedies without making an official report to the university, email advocate(daustin.utexas.edu.
For more information about reporting options and resources, visit https://titleix.utexas.edu or
contact the Title IX Office at titleix(daustin.utexas.edu.

SECURITY, SAFETY, AND SUSTAINABILITY_ The studio is an exceptional learning environment.
Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying
of fixative, Spray paint, or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary
component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week. Do not leave your studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold
yourself and your studiomates accountable for the security of your shared space.

The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and reuse
to reduce material consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or
any other containers with white bags. The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system for students
to donate materials and take what they need for studio and fabrication coursework, is available
throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA Technology Lab. All unwanted, reusable
materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in the Technology Lab at the end of
the semester.

EMERGENCY EVACUATION_ In the case of emergency evacuation:

e Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm Is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside.

e Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building
they may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when
entering the building.

e Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the Instruction of faculty or
class instructors.e Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
Services offices.

Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:

www.utexas.edu/emergency.

BUILD LAB POLICY_ All students, faculty, and staff who wish to use the UTSOA Build Lab must
take the EHS’s online training. As this training is supplemental to UTSOA’s Build Lab training, no
one Is excluded or grandfathered from the requirement; both are required in order to use the
Build Lab’s tools and equipment. The Build Lab has a card reader installed at the entrance. Those
who have taken the online EHS training will be able to gain access during operating hours by
swiping their UT ID cards at the door. More information can be found at:

https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/SOABuildLab/Build+Lab+Access+and+Training.

RESOURCES_A variety of information and tools will be used during the course of the semester. As
the school transitions to a remote studio environment this summer, new tools and approaches
will supplement those that are already familiar to you. While we will use ZOOM for virtual face-to-
face discussions, we will also incorporate other communication applications, as needed. Please
be patient with yourself and others as we all learn and experiment with these new platforms for
better communication and creativity.