ALD 329, Section and Acquisition of Language and Literacies
Unique Number: 73365
Summer I, 2020
Course Information
Class meets: MTWTHE, 2:30-4:00 pm, Online

Instructor: Laura Turner Office Location: Online

Pronouns: she, her, hers Office Hours: 4:00-5:30 pm (or by appointment)
Email: laura.turner@utexas.edu

T.A.: Mohit Mehta Office Location: Online

Pronouns: he, him, his Office Hours: 4:00-5:30 pm (or by appointment)

Email: mohit.mehta@utexas.edu

Land Acknowledgment

We begin this syllabus by recognizing that we stand on the shared lands and waters of the Comanche
and Tonkawa. We express our respect for the three federally-recognized nations: Alabama-Coushatta,
the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, and the Ysleta del Sur Pueblo, within the state as well as
other Indigenous peoples and nations such as the Karankawa, Caddo, Lipan Apache, Comanche,
Wichita, Coahuiltecan, Neches, Comecrudo, and Mission Indians that have historic ties to these
homelands. We also acknowledge the multiple ways the State of Texas and the residents of this Land
have benefitted from the forced and systematic removal of Native peoples from Texas. Land
acknowledgements are a small step toward correcting the stories and practices that erase
Indigenous histories and the ongoing presence of Indigenous peoples today. As teacher
educators and researchers, many of us are complicit in this erasure, and it is imperative
that we recognize, support, and advocate for the sovereignty of Native nations in our work.

University Catalog Course Description

This course will provide an overview of theoretical and practical perspectives on the nature of language
in education, its use and usage. Students will explore principles of discourse, phonology, morphology,
syntax and semantics as they relate to second language acquisition. We will also cover language
varieties, social conventions and linguistic structures. The focus of the course is to prepare pre-service
teachers to best meet the semiotic, linguistic, academic, etc. needs of emergent bilingual
students in the K-12 classroom from a holistic multilingual perspective.

Topics include English structures and analysis, identification of emergent bilingual students’ academic
and linguistic learning needs, and pedagogical strategies to promote language acquisition. Our beliefs
about language and its acquisition shape the kinds of opportunities we provide our emergent bilingual
students and are therefore highly consequential to their educational trajectories. This course is
structured to support the student in designing, implementing and reflecting on the language
development of emergent bilingual students in a variety of contexts from a holistic perspective.
Subjects explored in the course include initial language and literacy acquisition theory; second
language acquisition theory; relations among first and additional languages in literacy and language
acquisition; home, school, and learners’ perspectives; and current issues in literacy and multilingual
classrooms.Course Goals
By the end of the semester, the successful student will be able to:

1. Discuss the complexities of the English language.

2. Explain English language structures and patterns.

3. Critically analyze the linguistic features of an emergent bilingual’s oral language sample from a
holistic multilingual, multimodal perspective.

4. Understand language as a sociopolitical and historical construct.

5. Appreciate varieties of the English language and its ongoing transformation.

6. Identify the linguistic challenges facing emergent bilingual students in the academic context.

7. Design activities appropriate to emergent bilingual students’ linguistic needs in the academic
context.

8. Identify and reflect upon attitudes towards, and modes of inquiry regarding language.

9. Articulate theories of language (e.g. variation, phonology, social conventions, use/usage).
10. Identify instructional strategies to address emergent bilingual students’ academic & linguistic
development.

Required Reading
Freeman, D. E. and Freeman, Y. S. (2014). Essential linguistics: What teachers need to know to teach
ESL, reading, spelling, and grammar (Second Edition). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Supplemental course readings will be available on Canvas

Educator Standards this Course Addresses
ISTE Standards
TEA Educator Standards

Course prerequisites: Applied Learning and Development 327

Writing Flag

ALD 329 carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you will write regularly throughout the semester,
complete a substantial writing project, receive feedback from your instructor and your peers to help
you improve your writing, and provide feedback to your peers. You will also have the opportunity to
revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. A
substantial portion of your grade will come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the
Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal
Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.

Statement on Learning Success

Your success in this class is important to us. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. Together we'll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. We also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available
through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but Iam happy to connect you with a person or Center
if you would like.Cross Cutting Themes and Professionalism

Students in this course are held to professionalism standards in line with the Cross Cutting Themes of
the College of Education (see p. 9-10 of this syllabus). As a representative of UT and a future educator,
please practice the standards of professionalism you would in a school or other educational setting,
whether this course is or is not field-based. We are building dispositions of the profession, which
include those professional attitudes, values, and beliefs expected of an education professional. When
we learn in schools and other educational spaces, we enter with humility, open to what we can learn in
the setting and from the students, teachers and other community members. We also practice
reciprocity, considering how we can contribute to the places where we are fortunate to learn.
University classrooms are places to engage in these practices of open learning and reciprocity. Students
should be open to new perspectives and work collegially with others, including instructors.

Attendance Policy
PDS Policy: The PDS policy for attendance is as follows: Attendance is mandatory and arriving on
time and staying the full length of the class is required.
e There are no unexcused absences.
¢ You are allowed one excused absence for the semester (see below).
¢ Subsequent excused absences will be at the discretion of the instructor.
¢ Each unexcused absence will mean a deduction of % letter grade in your final grade.
* More than 3 absences (including excused and unexcused) will result in a failing grade for
the class.
¢ A pattern of tardiness or early departures will affect your grade.
¢ Excessive tardies or early departures (3 or more) also constitutes an unexcused absence.

Students will not be penalized for absences due to the observance of religious holidays that fall on our
scheduled class day; please give me advance notice of these absences (see below for more detailed info).

Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or
extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a
religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this
absence, although you will still be responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable.
Check with us for details or arrangements.

If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your classmates to get a run-down and notes on
any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were gone that raise
questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email specific
questions you have in advance so that we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is not
specific enough.

Policy on Children in Class/Working from Home

I fully support parents and guardians attending school. As the university does not have a formal policy
on children in the classroom, the policy described here is a reflection of my own beliefs and
commitments (and with all due credit to Dr. Melissa Cheyney at Oregon State University who
circulated her own policy through social media).All exclusively breastfeeding babies are welcome in class as often as is necessary to support the
breastfeeding relationship. You and your nursing baby are welcome in class anytime.

For older children and babies, I understand that minor illnesses and unforeseen disruptions in
childcare often put parents in the position of having to choose between missing class to stay home
with a child or finding childcare, which can be a burden in many ways. While this is not meant to be a
long-term childcare solution, occasionally bringing a child to class in order to cover gaps in care is

perfectly acceptable.

For students learning at home with children or others you care for at home, your children are welcome
on the screen and I understand you may need to take breaks from class when you are attending to
those in your care. Finally, lam open to talking about needed accommodations with deadlines as the
semester progresses.

Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)

Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they
have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly honor your

 

request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so

that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
University Resources for Students

Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are

circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building
needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as
possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a
documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students
with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an

official letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information, visit

http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.

Basic Needs Security
Any student who faces challenges securing their food or housing and believes this may affect their
performance in the course is urged to contact the Dean of Students for support. Furthermore, please

notify the instructors if you are comfortable in doing so. This will enable them to provide any
resources that they may possess. (Thanks to Dr. Sara Goldrick-Rab [@saragoldrickrab] for this

language.)Counseling and Mental Health

Counselors in Academic Residence Program (CARE)

CARE is the university's Counseling and Mental Health Center program that was created in
collaboration with the Office of the Provost. CARE’s primary mission is to provide access to mental
health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically. The College of
Education CARE counselor, Danie White, has regular office hours 1-2p.m. T/F in SZB 212E,
512.232.6862 or dlwhite@austin.utexas.edu.

Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress.

All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask
for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.

If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety
or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.

http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html

The Sanger Learning Center

Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,

please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).

Other Resources

Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/

Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/

ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/

Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/

BeVocal

BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power
to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and
reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on
campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.

Important Safety Information

If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right — it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus

Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/

Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.

e Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
entering the building.

e Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class.

e Inthe event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services office.

e Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency

procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency

Title IX Reporting
Title [X is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the
university can:

1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.

2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced

harm

or have become involved in a Title [X investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.

Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title [X to the Title IX
Coordinator. Iam a Responsible Employee and must report any Title [IX related incidents that
are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If
you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and
resources, Visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title [X Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.

University Policies
Academic Integrity

Students should be aware that all required writing assignments may be submitted through a
plagiarism-detection tool, such as Canvas Turnitin. Tools like this are designed to helpstudents avoid plagiarism and improper citation. The software encourages original writing and
proper citation documentation practices by cross-referencing submitted materials with an
archived database of journals, essays, newspaper articles, books, and other published work. In
addition, other methods may be used to determine the originality of the paper. Tips for
maintaining academic integrity AND the University’s academic integrity policy are available
at: All students are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University
Honor Code available at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.

Q Drop Policy

If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you'll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,

see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop

Cross-Cutting Themes and Creed

The teacher preparation program at The University of Texas at Austin is committed to creating a
society that is more just, caring, inclusive, and democratic through transformation of educational
practices. Too often, universities and schools have engaged in racist and other oppressive practices that
replicate and perpetuate the status quo in our society, rather than working against inequities. We
believe there is a more powerful path. Following The University of Texas motto, “What starts here
changes the world,” we teach to change the world.

Schools, districts and universities are located within oppressive social, economic and political systems.
Teachers must recognize the oppressive conditions that many families and communities experience
related to their identities—racial, ethnic, linguistic, social class, religious, gender, sexual orientation,
immigrant status, abilities, and other positions in society. At the same time, teachers must recognize
the cultural and linguistic wealth that exists in these communities, along with their histories of
resilience and resistance in the pursuit of justice. Understanding these critical perspectives on society,
culture and schooling is critical for teachers’ development and enactment of curricular and
pedagogical knowledge across school subjects, such as reading, language arts, social studies, science and
mathematics.

We practice vision, courage, and determination because these stances and practices require a lifelong
commitment and ongoing, critical inquiries in our personal and professional lives. As teachers, we
serve our students well by cultivating in them these same commitments and capacities.

As educators we are committed to educational change that allows us to enact our vision for teacher

preparation. Identities, Values, and Practices serve as our guide, as we are always in process. While
listed separately the themes are deeply connected, so to work on one is to work on many.
Pp y ply y

po Theme Statement Creed StatementWho are
we?
Identities

What do
we value?
Values

We are continuously examining how our
identities’ sometimes afford us privileges and
other times, result in oppression. We recognize
that our personal identities are deeply connected
to our professional identities, and contribute to
how we work with our students, communities
and colleagues.

We research and inquire to better understand our
students, curriculum and teaching across school
subjects’, and our own dispositions and practices
as teachers. We continue to grow our
professional identities to support our work of
building inclusive and anti-oppressive
classrooms, schools, and local and global
communities.

We value educational justice, inclusiveness and
continuous learning, and we are committed to
being teachers who take on the challenges and
risks associated with teaching in service of these
values.

We value the multiple cultures, languages,
knowledges, and experiences of our students and
the communities we work alongside, and we see
these as essential to a healthy and productive

society.

We value shared responsibility over individual
accountability within educational systems. As
teachers, we are committed to working
collaboratively with our students, teacher
colleagues, families, and communities in the
pursuit of our collective growth and well-being.

I am self-aware. I recognize who
Tam and who I am becoming in
terms of my multiple identities.

Iam a learner. | will grow my
teaching into more powerful
practices and share them with
others.

I value courage and
determination. I will view all
challenges that confront me as
opportunities to grow and
change.

I value learners’ differences as
strengths. I will respect and
engage with differences and will
craft my teaching to build upon
and sustain the abilities, cultures
and languages my students bring
to school.

I value shared responsibility. |
will hold myself responsible for all
my teaching and will share in this
responsibility with others to build
a community that contributes to
the growth and well-being of

students.What do
we
practice?
Practice

We continuously reflect on how our diverse
perspectives and identities’ matter when working
with others, including students, families and
colleagues. This continual reflection allows us to
build trusting relationships and engage in
humanizing practices.

We recognize students’ identities’ and strengths

and honor the resources they bring. We question
the materials, curriculum, and instructional
methods that are in place. We continually adapt
and redesign our teaching practices in response to
changing opportunities and demands in our
transnational society. We dream of possibilities
for students’ educational futures.

I practice reflection on action.
I will build humanizing practices
and trusting relationships through
my ongoing critical reflection.

I practice imaginative change. I
will imagine the possibilities of a
student-centered curriculum that
is transformative for students and
our collective communities.

 

We will be the teachers who, working with families, communities and our colleagues, teach to change

the world.

‘racial, ethnic, linguistic, religious, gender, sexual orientation, social class, immigrant status, abilities,
and other positions in society.
‘reading, language arts, social studies, science and mathematics anchored in critical perspectives on
society, culture and schooling

Grading Policies

Flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. We intend to work with
you with support if you miss an assignment, but final grades are firm.

> few fo dom

 

a*Please note that continuation in the PDS requires a minimum grade of “C” in each of the PDS
courses.

Required Devices and Learning Platforms

Use of e-mail and Canvas are essential elements of this class. Successful completion of this course
requires that you record a language sample from your emergent bilingual student for transcription and
holistic analysis. Projects and assignments must be submitted electronically, posted to the class
Canvas website. E-mail through Canvas will be used to communicate with the instructor and other
class members. A Canvas site has been established for this course; the site contains a copy of this
syllabus, project guidelines, readings which are not in your textbooks, and general course information.
Announcements, updates, and new documents will be posted throughout the course; students are
expected to check Canvas regularly. Students are encouraged to post their own presentations to the
group presentation folder on Canvas so others in the class may have access to them. All students must

  

Assignments
Organization and planning are essential characteristics of professionalism that will help you meet
assignment due dates and will influence the quality of your work. Late submissions will receive partial
credit. A student with an emergency situation preventing a timely submission should contact the
course instructors immediately.

1. Critical Commentaries & Critical Reflections (10% of grade)
Approximately 1 paragraph per reading
CCs and CRs are designed to help you organize, synthesize, and connect course readings—to easily
locate and identify reference materials for exams and the final project- as well as for reference in future
coursework. Critical commentaries (due on Sunday evenings) should be written in paragraph form
and include the following information:

1. Title — Full citation of the reading (in APA format)

2. Brief Summary — 2-3 sentence summary of key points and note any details, key
concepts, etc. which particularly struck you.

3. Response - Your opinion of and reaction to the reading and course material. Did the text
trigger a connection or reaction upon reading? Comment on, dialogue and interact
with the text. Did you agree / disagree? Why? Did you gain any new insights from the
reading? Was it helpful? Why / why not? How does it relate to other readings for this
class or others? Does it relate to your work tutoring your bilingual English learner
student?

4. Key Question/Critical Concept—At least one idea per week that either (a) requires
further clarification, or (b) you synthesized in a novel way and will share with your

colleagues.

 
 
 

 

For every 12 hours that pass

beyond the time they are due, 5 points will be deducted.

10“While informal, please carefully edit for spelling, grammar, syntax and clarity.**

Critical Reflections, due on Friday evenings, are organized to serve as a reflection on the week’s
learning experiences and can be written in paragraph format.

2. Tutoring (10% of grade)
Online tutoring requirement: 5 hours
Several school and tutoring organizers will speak to our class at the start of the Summer session. Please

either sign up with them, or let the instructor know where you will be volunteering prior to the 3“
class meeting on Monday, June 8. Begin tutoring by Week 2 and complete all required hours by

Week 4. All 5 HOURS are REQUIRED to receive CREDIT:

  

a) A signature from your tutoring coordinator will be required on the Tutoring Sign-in
sheet at the end of the semester. Include your tutoring coordinator’s preferred contact
(email/phone) on the form. Submit this form under the tutoring assignment on
Canvas.

b) You will also complete the Tutoring Log for each tutoring session in order to reflect
upon the experience and document how the time was spent. These entries will detail the
work you conducted with your student that day, strategies you may have used, and any
lingering questions you might have. Submit this form under the tutoring assignment
on Canvas (with the sign-in sheet).

c) Atthe end of the semester, you will complete a Tutoring Reflection Form, also to be
submitted on Canvas.

3. Presentation of Findings/Tutoring Reflection (10% of grade)

At the end of the course, all students will conduct a 10-minute presentation that will serve as a
reflection of the tutoring experience. The presentation should lift up the innovative semiotic and
linguistic practices of their emergent bilingual student and participants in the course should use the
space to reflect upon their perspective as a future educator or community member in relation to
bi/multilingual learners.

4, Extended Essay Response & Writer’s Workshop (30%)
Extended Essay Response: During Week 3, all students will conduct an extended essay response (15%)

in relation to a menu of topics presented in the course (language policy, immigration, language
acquisition, programs for emergent bilingual students, the standard language myth). Students will
have space to draft the extended essay response in class in collaboration with the instructors and
outside of class.

Writer’s Workshop &5 Peer Review Session: During Week 6, students will participate in a peer-review
and writer’s workshop session (15%) to receive descriptive feedback surrounding their final paper. All

students will receive specific, descriptive feedback from a peer in class, in addition to the course
instructor, to guide their final papers.

5. Semiotic & Linguistic Analysis from a Holistic Multilingual Perspective (40%)

11Students will demonstrate their understanding of the (1) distinct structure and features of oral English,
and (2) the innovative semiotic and linguistic repertoire of an emergent bilingual student by utilizing
information obtained throughout the tutoring experience, coupled with a language sample from a
tutoring session with their student. Language samples will include approximately 10 minutes of
discussion around a topic and will serve as a supplemental tool to refer back to when crafting your
final paper. The purpose of the analysis is to place your student at the center of the paper, lifting up
the complexity, nuances, and contradictions involved in second language acquisition. The analysis
should focus on the innovative practices utilized by your student (semiotic and linguistic) as a
multilingual. All analyses should be descriptive vs. prescriptive and approach the concept of language
and meaning making from a holistic multilingual perspective. You are not prescribing or “correcting,”
you ave approaching language from a descriptive, holistic lens. Claims made in the linguistic analyses
must be supported by references drawn from course readings as well as external texts.

Final projects will consist of 4 discrete sections:

1. Introduction
A brief overview of your work with your student. Describe your student's background and experience
and include any interesting features of your time spent together.

(Maximum: 3/4 page)

2. Linguistic Analysis
An analysis of your student’s linguistic development as represented in the language sample:
i. Phonological development
ii. | Morphological development
iii, | Syntactic development
iv. Semantic development
v. | Pragmatic competence (e.g., discourse routines, social conventions)
vi. Holistic Perspective: Semiotic resources and multiple modes of meaning-making;
visual, spacial, gestural, sociocultural perspective.
(Maximum: 6 pages; min. 10 references)

3. Recommended Classroom Practices
i. Describe 2-3 recommended instructional strategies for working with your bilingual EL
student.
ii. Strategies should target improving content area development and comprehension
based on your work together.
(1-2 pages; min. 2 references)

4. SOLOM Results and Discussion

e Analyze the how and why of your participant’s SOLOM results.

e How (well) does the SOLOM measure a learner’s use of: syntax, semantics, morphology,
phonology, language use/usage? Which features of the student’s oral language prompted the
rater to place him/her at each level in each domain? Does the overall rating reflect the student's

12abilities in the larger academic context? How well do ratings in the individual language ability
areas reflect the overall assessment? Limitations and contradictions.
e What questions did the SOLOM answer for you as a teacher? Were any areas left unaddressed?
(1-2 pages; min. 2 references)

Reference list for all three sections combined

Narrative (Sections 1-4 above)
Copy of completed SOLOM, less student name
Annotated Transcript of the language sample (scan or hard copy)

Style Guide:

References in APA format (www.apastyle.org);

Appropriate use of headers and sub-headers to organize the written text
Double-spaced, 12 pt. font

One-inch margins

Last name/page number(s) in footer

All materials must be uploaded electronically

to Canvas (narrative and appendices; SOLOM; transcript)
by Monday, July 13, 2020 by 11:59 p.m,

Critical Commentaries (5) and _ | 10 points each 10%
Critical Reflections (5)

Tutoring 30 points (including post 10%
reflections, sign-in sheet, &
tutoring log)

 

13Course Outline
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website
at pe /uexasinsructur.com s://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use i to ask questions about the course

Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you
receive the changes with as much advance notice as possible).

Schedule Snapshot

Introduction & Overview | Reading assignments on | Complete Student
Syllabus &5 Course Canvas Information Sheet
Expectations

Language as a Tool, Reading assignments on | Critical Reflection #1:

Multilingual Perspectives | Canvas Due Friday, June 5, at
midnight

How Linguists Study Reading assignments on | Critical Commentary #1:

Language Canvas Due Sunday, June 7 at
midnight

Sign-up for tutoring;

Begin tutoring

First Language Reading assignments on
Acquisition Canvas

Language Policy Reading assignments on
Canvas

6/11 | Language Policy Films on Canvas
Film Sesston
6/12 | Affirming Equal Rights Reading assignments on | Identify Student for
Canvas Sample

 

146/25

What the Research Does
and Does Not Say...

Student Oral Language
Observation Matrix

(SOLOM)

The Standard Language
Myth & Language

Variation

Extended Essay
Response; Independent
Writing & Conferencing

Second and Written

Language Acquisition

Translanguaging

Raciolinguistics

Semantics

Reading assignments on
Canvas

Reading assignments on
Canvas

Reading assignments on
Canvas

Reading assignments on
Canvas

Reading assignments on
Canvas

Reading assignments on
Canvas

Reading assignments on
Canvas

Reading assignments on
Canvas

Critical Reflection #2:

Due Friday, June 12, at
midnight

Critical Commentary #2:

Due Sunday, June 14 at
midnight

Extended Essay Response:

Due Friday, June 19 at
midnight

Critical Commentary #3:

Due Sunday, June 21 at
midnight

Language Samples Due

Tutoring Post #1 on
Padlet

Language Tra nscriptions

Due

 

156/26 | Pragmatics Reading assignments on | Critical Reflection #3:
Canvas Due Friday, June 26 at
midnight
6/29 | Phonology Reading assignments on | Critical Commentary #4:
Canvas Due Sunday, June 28 at
midnight
6/30 | Implications from Reading assignments on
Phonology: The “Why” Canvas
7/1

Morphology Reading assignments on

Canvas

Implications from Reading assignments on | Tutoring Post #2 on

Morphology: The “Why” | Canvas Padlet

Reading assignments on | Critical Reflection #4:

Canvas Due Friday, July 3 at
midnight

midnight

Peer Review & Writer’s Reading assignments on | Assignments Due for

Workshop Canvas Peer Review:
Phonological
Development write-up &
Pragmatic Competence
write-up (drafts)

Individual Conferences Individual Conferences Individual Conferences
(Presentation of Findings
& Final Papers)

Whole Class: Reading assignments on | Critical Reflection #5:
Presentation of Findings | Canvas In-class reflection

16

Pt

ov

6 7/6 Implications from Reading assignments on | Critical Commentary #5:
Syntax: The “Why” Canvas Due Sunday, July 5 at

if| ——o—

Detailed Daily Schedule

 

Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Fillmore, L. W., & Snow, C. E. (2000). What teachers need to know about language
e Zeller, et al. (2010). From stranger to friend: The effect of service learning on pre-service
teachers’ attitudes toward diverse populations

Assignments Due: Complete Student Information Sheet
This will be completed in class on Thursday, June 4

 

Critical Reflection #1: Due Friday, June 5, at midnight
Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Garcia, O. (2009). Emergent bilinguals and TESOL-What’s in a Name?
e Martinez, R. (2018). Beyond the English learner label: Recognizing the richness of
bi/multilingual students’ linguistic repertoires

Assignments Due: Sign-up for tutoring by Monday, June 8

 

Critical Commentary #1: Due Sunday, June 7 at midnight
Read Before Class: Course text
e Freeman & Freeman (2014a). How Linguists Study Language: Ch. 1 (pp. 1-20)

Assignments Due: Begin tutoring

 

Read Before Class: Course text
e Freeman & Freeman (2014b). First Language Acquisition: Ch. 2 (pp. 21-51).

_—
NWatch Before Class: Link on Canvas
e Deb Roy TED Talk: The Birth of a Word

 

Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Macias, R. (2014). Benefits of bilingualism: In the eye of the beholder?

Explore Before Class: Link also on Canvas
e Our Nation’s English Language Learners (the breakdown of languages by state is interesting to

explore in the /anguages section)

Asynchronous Meeting / Film Session
Watch: Links also on Canvas
e The Lemon Grove Incident: Roberto Alvarez v. The Board of Trustees of the Lemon Grove

School District (1931)
e Stolen Education (through UT Libraries, Kanopy)

 

Critical Reflection #2: Due Friday, June 12, at midnight
Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Hakuta, K. (2011). Education language minority students and affirming their equal rights:
Research and practical perspectives

Assignments Due: Identify Student for Language Sample

 

Critical Commentary #2: Due Sunday, June 14 at midnight
Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Goldenberg, C. (2008). Teaching English language learners: What the research does—and does

not—say

Review Before Class: Readings and links on Canvas
e Garcia-Medina (2010). Table 3.1, Types of Educational Programs for Emergent Bilingual
Students

18Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Fillmore, L. W. (2000). Loss of family languages: Should educators be concerned?
e Excerpt from Tongue Tied: Indian Boy Love Song (#2) (p. 55) Sherman Alexie
e Excerpt from Tongue Tied: My Hawa'i' (p. 179-183) Nany Veary
e Excerpt from Tongue Tied: Masks and Acculturation (p. 32-33) Margaret Montoya

 

Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Suarez-Orozco et al. (2008). Networks of relationships

 

Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Lipp-Green, R. (2012). The standard language myth
e Delpit, L. (2002). “No kinda sense,” In The Skin We Speak

Watch Before Class: Link also on Canvas
e Why English Class is Silencing Students of Color, Jamila Lyiscott TEDx

 

Extended Essay Response: Due Friday, June 19 at midnight

 

Critical Commentary #3: Due Sunday, June 21 at midnight
Read Before Class: Course text
e Freeman & Freeman (2014c). Second and Written Language Acquisition: Ch. 3 (pp. 52-83)

 

Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Velasco, P. and Garcia, O. Translanguaging and the Writing of Bilingual Learners

_
\9Assignments Due: Language Sample Completed
Tutoring Post #1 on Padlet

 

Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Rosa, J. and Flores, N. (2017). Do you hear what I hear?

 

Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Ariza, E.N., Morales-Jones, C. A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010a). Semantics

Assignments Due: Language Sample Transcript

 

Critical Reflection #3: Due Friday, June 26 at midnight
Read Before Class: Readings on Canvas
e Ariza, E.N., Morales-Jones, C. A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010b). Pragmatics

 

Critical Commentary #4: Due Sunday, June 28 at midnight

Read Before Class: Course text and on Canvas
e Freeman & Freeman (2014d). English Phonology: Ch. 4 (pp. 89-118)
e Lippi-Green, R. (2012). The myth of non-accent

 

Read Before Class: Course text
e Freeman & Freeman (2014e). Implications from Phonology for Teaching a Second Language
and for Teaching Reading: Ch. 5 (pp. 119-145)

2

©Read Before Class: Course text
e Freeman & Freeman (2014f). English Morphology: Ch. 7 (pp. 180-208).

 

Read Before Class: Course text
e Freeman & Freeman (2014g). Implications from Morphology for Teaching a Second
Language and for Teaching Reading: Ch. 8 (pp. 209-229).

Assignments Due: Tutoring Post #2 on Padlet

 

Critical Reflection #4: Due Friday, July 3 at midnight
Read Before Class: Course text
e Freeman & Freeman (2014h). English Syntax: Ch. 9 (pp. 230-264).

 

Critical Commentary #5: Due Sunday, July 5 at midnight
Read Before Class: Course text and on canvas
e Freeman & Freeman (2014i). Implications from Syntax for Teaching a Second Language and
Teaching Reading: Ch. 10 (pp. 265-287).
e Martinez, R. (2010). Spanglish as a literacy tool

 

Write Before Class:
Assignments Due for Peer Review (Bring to Class): Phonological Development write-up &
Pragmatic Competence write-up (drafts)

Assignments Due at the End of Class: Phonological Development write-up with feedback,
Pragmatic Competence write-up with feedback, and one additional section of your choice

Sign-up for individual conferences

21Individual conferences (presentation of findings & final paper)

 

Presentation of Findings (Individual Presentations)
Critical Reflection #5: in-class reflection