Senior Lecturer

ROBERT STEPNOSKI

rob@austin.utexas.edu

School of Architecture, University of Texas at Austin 0:512-232-7383 ¢:512-709-5923
https://soa.utexas.edu/people/robert-stepnoski
preparation Boston Architectural Center (BAC) Boston, MA 1995-2000
Professional Bachelor of Architecture
Alfred State College Alfred, NY 1992-1995
Associate of Architectural Engineering Technology
experience Senior Lecturer University of Texas At Austin, Austin, TX present
FAA Licensed Remote Aircraft Pilot, Pt107 2015-present
Owner Step Technologies, LLC., Austin, TX 1997-present
Owner Ridestoke, LLC., Austin, TX 2015-present
IT Director, Associate Prellwitz/Chilinski Associates, Inc. (PCA), Cambridge, MA 1998-2008
Designer/Drafter/CAD Support 7LCR, Boston, MA 04/96-03/98
sketch Robert Stepnoski is a Senior Lecturer at the University of Texas at Austin. He received his

Professional Bachelor of Architecture from the Boston Architectural Center, Boston
Massachusetts.

Rob’s current research focuses on the use of UAVs for mapping and modeling paired with
Information Technologies for analysis and site discovery. Specifically using the UAV to generate
Aerial Photography and Video Capture of a site a varying altitudes. During each flight, data is
collected to produce 3D Point Clouds, Digital Surface Models (Accurate, Geo-Referenced
elevation map, ready for ArcGIS, Revit, and Civil 3D workflows), Orthomosaic, (High resolute
aerial map with corrected perspective), Contour Lines, (generate real-time contour lines from
captured topography), and 3D Textured Models which are perfect for VR and full color 3D
printing.

Research into the use of the UAVs to aid first responders and simultaneously map an evolving
flood plains a continued area of interest for Rob. The ability for a UAV to enter an area affected
by a disaster, which a first responder should not be in, is intriguing.

Virtual and Augmented Reality is yet another aspect of Rob’s research. The process of
translating Building Information Models into the Virtual Information Modeling environment
provides the opportunity to experience the model virtually and reveal the depth of information
embedded in that model. Virtual Information Modeling is the immersive experience of Building
Information Models within the Gear VR headset. The VIM can also be viewed using a desktop
viewer or touchscreen. VIM technology takes full advantage of the "meta data" you enter into your
Revit model. Rob’s pursuit is to further explore the depths of BIM/VIM.

Systems Administration has provided the exploration of advanced level computer/server support.
Implementation of Virtualized Server Environment, Plotting RIP Color Calibration/Profiling
System, 3DS Rending/Animation Farm. Insures data integrity, instructs IT best-practices, policies
and workflows for the School of Architecture.

Step Step Technologies (“Step”) is a full service computer network company, offering software
support, website design, development and maintenance, custom system integration. Since its
inception in 1997, Step has helped its clients make smarter decisions with creative solutions in
technology and design. “One Step Tech Support for Architects & Interior Designers”. During
Rob’s tenure at Step Technologies, he enabled several design firms to make the migration fromcomments

proficient in

interests

AutoCAD to Revit, bringing each into BIM compliance.

As IT Director and Associate at Prellwitz/Chilinski Associates, Inc. (PCA), Cambridge, MA Rob
played an integral as part of PCA’s management team in staffing, employee skill-set
management, budgeting, hiring, IT purchasing and forecasting. Designed and managed the
computer network infrastructure consisting of 8 servers, 50 workstations, 3 remote offices, VOIP
tel system, offsite backup. Managed IT budgeting, purchasing and forecast. System wide
troubleshooting, user support, systems installation, repair, maintenance.

RideStoke LLC provides a creative writing and audio visual outlet for this mountain biking interest.
Ridestoke is a website collective for all different types of mountain biking. Single track riding, downhill,
pump track and trials riding. http://ridestoke.com

During off work hour times, Rob participates in the design and build of freeride mountain bike
parks including freeride512.com. Progressive trail building helps refine a mountain biker's skillset
and provides a strong upward path for beginners to accelerate. Rob has found that a leader and
mentor of an always evolving riding culture, there becomes a creative outlet of watching the rider
traverse the final build, and have it work.

The most compelling thing about Rob is that he has a very high action/talk ratio. When most
people talk and think and theorize about how to do something, Rob is already quietly, carefully
and quickly getting it done. Rob has all of the imagination of a creative professional combined
with the methodical expertise if a technical professional. Moreover Rob has an infectious, good
attitude that elevates the mood of everyone around him.

Having known Rob for years, | am consistently impressed by his unique and innovative approach
to client challenges. Having honed his ‘one stop shop’ approach, Rob has a gift for helping clients
with their technology standards (within the CAD, Graphics, Color, and Network Environment) and
how they could use their technology more efficiently. Technically he is very fluid and current on
finding and providing the best mix of solutions at the price a customer needs in order to make
positive improvements within the company. | would recommend him 100% for any client that is
looking for a reliable, go-to resource to help improve their business.

Pix4D Suite, Autodesk Suite, Sketchup, Windows Server/Exchange Systems, Reprocontrol
RIP Plotting Systems, Advanced Color Calibration, ESRI Suite, Antivirus/Security Applications,
Juniper VPN/Firewall Appliances, HP/Dell Servers/Printers/Plotters, HP/Cisco Series
Networking, MFP Printers/Plotters, Adobe Creative/Video/Web Suite, HTML, CSS, PHP, Email
Marketing Newsletters, Win, Mac, Linux Platforms.

fatherhood, uav flight, business owner/management, mountain biking, hybrid architecture,
web development, audio design, video production