jvomapeatg

ALD 322; Unique #: 73355 SUMMEeP SéSSi0n One

Lisa SigaPoos: ISsigaPoos@utexas.edu
OPPice: $ZB 455 (Zoom)
Phone: 512-550-3948

Bequired Readings:
are listed on the class Schedule
(see end of syllabus) and are
available on Canvas in
corresponding Session module.

[Optional Text] Smith, DD, Tyler, NC, Skow, K.G. (2018). Introduction to
contemporary special education: New horizons (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle, NJ: Pearson
*Recommended for teacher majors

| COURSE DESCRIPTION DESCRIPTION

ae conducted via Modules & ———

This inbroductory course provides an
overview oP individual diPPerences
among people across age levels. The
course Pocuses on basic concepts,

sa =|(550e5, and ways to accommodate
individuals whose Features and/or

dca St allude conditions Make them "diPPerent" and

worthy of consideration.CULTURAL DIVERSITY FLAG

This course carries the flag for
Cultural Diversity in the United
States. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity
with a variety and richness of the
American cultural experience. You

should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come
from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at
least one US cultural group that has
experienced persistent
marginalization.

 

Physical & Health

  

AREAS OF FOCUS

Vision/Hearing TBI

Intellectual GiPbed Transition
Learning At-Risk Categories Adult Issues
Attention LGBT@+ ProPessionalism
Autism “Minorities Teaching Philosophy
Emotion & Behavior “Trauma

Speech & Language

NOTE: This course includes instruction in detection and education of students with
Dyslexia as indicated in the Texas Education Code.

  
  

  

Diversity & DifPerences
- Language, Treatment, & Attitude
Ableism/Disableism
Program & Services
Cultural Considerations
Elements of Inclusion
Practice of DifPerentiating

FOUNDATIONS

 
       
   
    
 
  

 
 
  
   
  
  
    
  

APPLICATIONS

 

   
  

  
     
   
   
  

    
   
   
 
 

   

om
e

/

Teaching Philosophy

Learning occurs best when participants are
enjoying what they are doing. I love to teach this
course and will have Pun being the instructor Por
this course. I am hopePul that you will Pind the
Modules to be informative and engaging.

Each Session will include a mixture of

instructional techniques, including readings,
pecorded lectures, discussions via Discussion
page, guest presenters, videos, and online
activities. I believe that you will Pind that the
time goes by relatively quickly as you work.~T

 

a

 
  

COURSE GOALS
Familiarize Students with the basic concepts and issues related to Zi

diversity in School, workplace, and Community.

 

Introduce the concept of inclusion and understand its implications Por
School and Community.

Introduce the concept of response-to-intervention and understand its
implication Por teachers and their students.

Present the key Peatures/characteristics oP a wide range of exceptional
individuals.

Examine the i$sues, needs, and strategies Por working with students who
are “at risk” Por academic diPPiculties.

Present a range of practices For diPFerentiating instruction that may be
appropriate Por students with Special needs across various levels oP School.

Discuss the legal mandates and Controversial issues associated with
addressing the needs of individuals who diPPer Prom those in Mainstream oF
society.

Highlight important Familial and cultural issues aPPecting individuals with
Special needs.

Present Strategies Por ePPective classroom Management and academic
instruction Por students with special needs.

Provide an opportunity to gain practical experience working with
students who struggle academically and/or behaviorally or who have

identiPied disabilities. Se
| & \9
| wnAcademic Honesty. I expect that all activities
performed in this class conform to a standard of
personal integrity and honesty. I will ask each student:
(1) to add the following statement to all major
assignments -- “I have neither given nor received
assistance from any other person on this [state the
activity|"; and (2) to sign it by typing
“lyour name]”. Please note that I am under
obligation from UT not to tolerate scholastic
dishonesty and to report any such incidents to the
Office of the Dean of Students.

  

Assignments, All assignments are to be
submitted electronically via Canvas! Work
submitted should reflect a quality in terms
of scope, depth, writing mechanics, and
appearance that would be expected of
undergraduates at one of the most
prestigious universities in the country.
Assignments turned in using Pages will
not be accepted,

    
   
   
   
     
   
   

  

Course-Related Accommodations, I have tried to design this class using the principle of universal design whereby most
elements of the course are designed to accommodate a wide range of student needs. However, Lam_prepared_and_ quite
willing to accommodate any_special needs that a student might have and for which Ihave not taken into consideration
in the design of the course. I will comply completely and without reservation to any official directives provided by the
Services for Students with Disabilities Office (www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd). I also encourage you to meet with
me if you have any learning-related needs about which I should be aware.

Religious Considerations. Policy for absences due to religious holy days is set in the Texas Education Code. The code
states that a student who misses an examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious
holy day must be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence,
provided he or she has properly notified each instructor. It 1s the policy of The University of Texas at Austin that the
student must notify each instructor at least 14 days prior to the classes scheduled on dates he or she will be absent. For
religious holidays that fall within the first two weeks of the semester, the notice should be given on the first day of the
semester. The student may not be penalized for these absences, but the instructor may appropriately respond if the
student fails to complete satisfactorily the missed assignment or examination within a reasonable time after the excused
absence. -Class is online but please let me know if you have a religious conflict!

CARE Counseling. CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It 1s common to need
support when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your control. CARE Counselors are available to
help with a variety of issues that may serve as a barrier to your academic success.

Your CARE Counselor in the College of Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her office is in the George I.
Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE
appointment. If you leave a voice mail, please include your name, EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours are also
available on Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 — 2 PM. You will check-in at the College of Education’s Student Division 1n
SZB 216, and they will let Danie know youre waiting, (Via Zoom now)B. Course structure

Online Module Based Instruction, This course
will be taught online using daily modules per
topic. There will be periodic synchronous

Zoom meetings (with time options) but most

of the course will be completed
asynchronously. All assignments will be
completed and submitted online.

 

General Evaluation Criteria:
All products generated and
activities perPormed in this
class will be evaluated on the
Pollowing dimensions:

   
   
      

Course requirements will
be discussed at the
beginning of the term. In-
depth descriptions of

  
     
 

*Directions were Pollowed.

*Product is well organized.

*Content rePlects
comprehensiveness and
ePPort.

*Content Shows

appropriate application

oP course content.

     

certain requirements will
be addressed through
videos in Modules.

 
         
   

Reading Reactions (RR). For each module (See course schedule for assigned module
readings) you will complete a reading reaction by answering the assigned questions.
Some modules will have more than one reading assigned but readings for which you

need to complete a RR_ will be designated with an * (some modules just one and some
for two readings). You will receive one point for completing each RR.

Product: Submit via Canvas
Due: 9:00 am dailyModule Engagement Activities (MEAs), You will complete two (2) MEAs per module-
except the first module which has 4. These activities will relate to the assigned readings
and topics covered in the module. Some activities will require posts to a designated
Discussion board. You will receive one point for completing each MEA.

Product: Submit via Canvas
Due: 9:00 am daily

submit a brief statement that captures, 1n your opinion, the most important things that
were discussed during the module. You will recerve one point for completing each SMIT.

Product: Submit via Canvas

Zoom Chat Participation: I want to see you and get to know you!!! At three points during
our time together (beginning, midway, end) you will need to participate in a Zoom Chat
with myself and others in class. For each Zoom Chat there will be three trme options
(you must participate in one of them).

Zoom One: Beginning of Term- morning option, midday option, night option
Zoom Two: Mid-Term- morning option, midday option, night option
Zoom Three: End of Term- morning option, midday option, night option

Product: Submit via Canvas
Due: At the time of the ZoomService Learning Project (SLP), Completion of the online IRIS module: Perceptions of
Disability. Through this module students will learn more about the abilities of people
with disabilities. You will complete the module and answer questions, reflecting on what
you learned.

*Guidelines provided and discussed via video in “SLP module”.

Product: Submit completed SLP via Canvas
Due date: 79

Mini Project (MP), This is an indtvidual project. As the now 2021 Paralympic games
approach it’s time we become advocates for equality for Paralympic athletes. Advocacy 1s
a major part of what we will be discussing 1n this course. We will utilize social media as a
way to inform society of the Paralympics.

*Guidelines provided and discussed via video in “MP module”.

Product: Submit completed MP via Canvas
Due date: 6.22

Final Project (FP). This is a fun way to wrap up your learning. Each student must develop

a project that sums up what you have learned and relates it to your future career. The

nature of this project will depend on your area of focus (1.e., major) and career goals.
*Guidelines provided and discussed via video in “FP module”.

NOTE: Be creative and make the product as useful to you as possible!

Product: Submit completed FP via Canvas
Due date: 79Assistive & Instructional Technology (AIT) Project. Through the AIT Canvas course
students in ALD 322 will become better acquainted with the use of assistive technology
(AT) across a number of settings in which individuals with unique needs work, learn,
and live.

*Guidelines provided and discussed via video in “AIT module”.

After you complete the online module through the AIT Canvas course upload the following:
(1) A screenshot of completed module quizzes
(2) Typed AIT Reflection
(3) Completed AIT post-survey (screenshot of completed survey)

Product: The Three above items submit via Canvas
Due Date: 79

Knowledge Assessment (KA), There will be one KA during this term (don’t let it scare you-
it’s a way for you to show what you have learned :). The KA 1s based on assigned
readings and content covered in each module. The KA will be completed online via
Canvas Quiz and you will have several days to complete. KA will be open resources (use
what you have) and a mixture of multiple choice & short answer.

*Guidelines provided and discussed via video in “KA module”.

NOTEI: You may request to take KA orally with instructor.
NOTE2: KA must be completed to receive a passing grade for the course.

Product: Completion of KA and submitted via Canvas
KA One: 6.24 - 79Grade of incomplete. The grade of "Incomplete" will be granted only if a student has
completed 75% of the course. This grade designation will result from a request from a
student based on extraordinary personal or academic reasons, or by me, when deemed
necessary. A due date for completing the course will be negotiated by the student and the
instructor. If the course 1s not completed by the agreed upon due date, the grade
corresponding to the number of points already earned will be submitted or will

automatically convert to a grade of “F” by the university system.

D. Assignment
Weighting and Grade
Determination:

"© 8 OO

BRS: 15 points
MEAS: 30 points arade Determination
—s = points A 268%. peo

B+ = 87-89%

podt ghikls B_ = 83-86%
B- = 80-82%

     
    

 

   
 

 

SUP: 15 points

AIT: 20 points
MP: 10 points

FP: 30 points

   

C+ = 77-79%

KA #1: 50 points 7 C= 73-76%

Total: 200 points
D = 60-69%
FE = below 60%Course Feature Information

Plagiarism UT Senate: “if you use words or ideas that are not your own you must
cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism.”
I am becoming increasing aware of this problem ... so, I strongly
recommend that you comply with issue of scholarly integrity.

Syllabus A syllabus establishes a “working relationship” between the student and
the course instructor. Participation in this course indicates your
acceptance of its content, requirements, and policies. Please review this
syllabus in detail as soon as possible and “Accept” the syllabus by
following the directions in the first module.

Supports for students UT provides a number of support services for students. An initial
overview of services can be found at the Dean of Students website
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu). Please see me 1f you have any
questions or concerns.

Withdrawal from course |If you believe that the purpose, goals, policies, requirements, or some
other aspect of this course does not meet your interests, needs, or
expectations, you should drop the class by the drop/add deadline. Note
that there are no other sections of ALD 322 available this term at UT
but this course will be offered again next term (or semester).

Okay. If you do decide to drop ALD 322, I wish you the best.

Discussion Page, On Canvas under Discussions (on left hand column): This is a place for students to
locate and post articles, videos, and other sources of information related to individuals with disabilities.
This is an optional assignment but will be used as a source of extra credit. I encourage all students to
participate in the activity!

NOTE#1: Each new post 1s worth 1 point.

NOTE#2: Every 2 comments to a post by another student 1s worth 1 point.
*Must be enough to show you engaged with post.

NOTE#3: Students may earn up to 4 extra credit pomnts.

NOTE#4: MEAs posts don’t count.NOTE 1: Each daily module covers 1 main topic (with sub-content topics)

NOTE 2: Each daily module runs from 9:00 am to 9:00 am (24 hours- see Module Completion)
- Modules will stay open through end of term
- Weekends can be used as catch up time if needed

NOTE 3: Each daily module (besides first module) will have 4 assignments: RR, 2 MEAs, SMIT

MODULE TOPIC READINGS MODULE COMPLETION

‘Cs Course overview -Power and Epiphany* 64 (9:00 am) - 6.5 (9:00 am)
*Tdentity -Video: Three Lessons* |- Reading Reaction (RR)
- 4 Module Engagement
Activities (MEA)
- Summary of Most Important

Things learned (SMIT)

History of Disability -The Disability Rights 6.5 (9:00 am) - 6.6 (9:00 am)
Presenter: Joe Tate Movement* - RR

*Diversity and Differences -Disablism or Ableism?* }- 2 MEAs

*Language, Attitude, & Treatment - SMIT

Mon_ |Special Education -Thinking About 68 (9:00 am) - 69 (9:00 am)
6/8 |*Laws Exceptionalities* -RR

* Categories - 2 MEAs

‘IEPs & Accommodation Plans - SMIT
*Process, Programs, Placements

RTI

School Practices -Differentiated Instruction* 169 (9:00 am) - 6.10 (9:00 am)
*Inclusive Education
*Differentiated Instruction

‘Accommodations & ModificationsMODULE TOPIC READINGS MODULE COMPLETION

5 Wed [Intellectual Disabilities -How Much I Love You* 16.10 (9:00 am) - 6.11 (9:00 am)
6/10 ‘Down syndrome -Introduction to ID -RR
* Transition - 2 MEAs
- SMIT
Thurs | Physical & Health Disabilities -Jerry’s Story* 6.11 (9:00 am) - 6.12 (9:00 am)
6/11 |* Accessibility -PHD Factsheet -RR
- 2 MEAs
- SMIT
Sensory Journey of a Deaf-Blind  |6.12 (9:00 am) - 6.13 (9:00 am)
6/12

 

 
  
  
 

   
 
     
  
     
 

       
      

  

*Deaf & Hard-of-Hearing Woman* -RR

Presenter: James Markert -Factsheets DHoH & BLV |- 2 MEAs
*Blind & Low Vision - SMIT
Presenter: Erin Shadwick

    

 
     
     

6.15 (9:00 am) - 6.16 (9:00 am)
-RR

- 2 MEAs

- SMIT

Learning Disabilities -How it Feels*
* Dyslexia -LD Factsheet

   
    

  
       
  
 
 
 

Tues -ADHD Stories* 6.16 (9:00 am) - 6.17 (9:00 am)
6/16 -ADHD Factsheet -RR

- 2 MEAs

- SMIT

10 Wed |Emotional & Behavioral Disorders
6/17 }* Anxiety
*PTSD

-What You Must Think of |6.17 (9:00 am) - 6.18 (9:00 am)
Me*
-ED Factsheet

  
  

ll Thurs |Autism Spectrum Disorder
6/18 |(Autism or ASD)

-Carrie’s Story* 6.18 (9:00 am) - 6.19 (9:00 am)
-ASD Factsheet -RR

- 2 MEAs
- SMIT

-Video: You’re Not Alone*|6.19 (9:00 am) - 6.20 (9:00 am)
-CD Factsheet

*Sensory Processing Disorder
Presenter: Adrienne Russell-George

12 Fri {Communication Disorders
6/19 |*Speech
*Language
Presenter: Dr. Mirza Lugo-NerisMODULE TOPIC BEADINGS MODULE COMPLETION
13 Mon
6/22

At-Risk Populations -Embracing Bilingualism in} 6.22 (9:00 am) - 6.23 (9:00 am)
*Minorities the Classroom*

*Trauma -Poverty_ The Five-H
*LGBTO+ Club*

14 Tues |TBI -TBI for Professionals* — |6.23 (9:00 am) - 6.24 (9:00 am)
6/23 |Bullying & Disabilities -Disabilities & Bullying |- RR
Giftedness -Giftedness Factsheet - 2 MEAs

- SMIT

15 Wed [Putting It All Together -Honors Day* 6.24 (9:00 am) - 6.25 (9:00 am)
6/24 |Concluding Thoughts -RR

- 2 MEAs
- SMIT