Desirée Pallais

The University of Texas at Austin
desiree.pallais@utexas.edu
Tel: (512) 970-1591

EDUCATION

2015 —now Doctoral student, Bilingual/Bicultural Program, College

2015

2004

1997

1988

1983

of Education, The University of Texas at Austin,
Post-graduate Specialization in Spanish Reading
Instruction, University of La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.
M.A. in Program Evaluation, University of Texas at
Austin, Honor standing.

M.A. Educational Technology, University of Salamanca,
Honorable mention for thesis defense.

B.A. Communication Science, Universidad
Centroamericana, Managua, Nicaragua.

B.A. History, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts.

INTERESTS AND EXPERTISE

Spanish literacy in the US (K-12 and after-school programs)
Spanish literacy in Latin America

Teacher education with asset-based pedagogies

Discourse analysis and case study research methods
Cross-cultural research with Latin American populations

PUBLICATIONS

In preparation

Pallais, D. (In preparation). Developing Spanish as part of Bilingual Teacher

Preparation: A Critical Literature Review.

Pallais, D. (2017) (Submitted). Three risky assumptions around literacy in the Peruvian

Amazon. A critical examination of international collaboration efforts. Jn
Preparation.Book chapters

Pallais, D. & Umansky, I. (2017). [Forthcoming: Book chapter on Views from Inside:
Languages, Cultures, and Schooling for K-12 Educators, edited by Drs. Joy
Egbert Gisela & Erns-Slavit. Accessible at:
http://www. infoagepub.com/products/Views-from-Inside

Pallais, D. (2014). Teaching English Language Learners (Eds.), edited by Martha C.
Hougen, Ph.D. Chapter author. Baltimore, MD: Paul Brookes Publishing.

Book reviews

Pallais, D. & Batista-Morales, N. (2017). Review of Judy Kalman and Brian Street's
Literacy and Numeracy in Latin America. New York, NY, Routledge, 2013, 226
pp. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education.

Pallais, D. (2017). Review of Regina Cortina's The Education of Indigenous Citizens in
Latin America. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters, 2014. 207 pp. Journal of
Latin American and Caribbean Anthropology,

Pallais, D. (2017). Review of Zhou and Bankston's The Rise of the New Second
Generation. Cambridge, UK, Polity Press, 2016, 248 pp. Ethnic and Racial
Studies.

Harvey, R. & Pallais, D. (2017). Review of Barbian & Cornell Gonzales' Rethinking
Bilingual Education. ()

Other publications

Pallais, D. (2016). Contribuciones de un proyecto de educacion intercultural bilingue en
la Amazonia. {Qué rol juega el contexto en las evaluaciones internacionales?
(Contributions of an intercultural bilingual project in the Amazon). Proceedings of
the XXII Graduate Colloquium of Iberian and Latin American Languages and
Cultures: Held at The University of Texas at Austin March 24-26, 2016. Web.

Pallais, D. & Thompson, S. (2014). Cross-linguistic Connections to Improve
Understanding of Reading Challenges in Spanish-speaking Students, available at
Academia.edu.

Pallais, Desirée. (2013). Apoyando la Lectura con ninos que se encuentran rezagados.
Revista Educando. Direccion Regional de Educacion, Gobierno Regional, San
Martin, Peru, Edicion 32, Septiembre, 2013.Pallais, Desirée. Aportes de la Ciencia Cognitiva para la Lectura Inicial. Gaceta de
Educacion y Pedagogia. Manuel Valdivia, 19 09 2013. Web. 25 Sep. 2013.
<http://gacetadeeducacion.wordpress.com>.

SELECTED CONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS

Pallais, D. (2018). Curricular and evaluation contributions of a bilingual intercultural
project in the Amazon. Comparative and International Education Society 62"! Annual
Conference, Mexico, March 25-29.

Pallais, D. (2018). Evaluation of Programs in Latin America, Session chair. SIG: Latin
America. Comparative and International Education Society 62" Annual Conference,
Mexico, March 25-29.

Callahan, R. Pallais-Downing, D. & De Paz, Mayte. Integrating Latino Immigrant
Parents' Funds of Knowledge in an Engineering Education Curriculum. American
Educational Research Association (AERA), Roundtable Session 12, San Antonio, Texas,
April 28.

Pallais, D. Pedagogical Strategies of Preservice Bilingual Teachers When Teaching Art
at the Museum. Part of a Group Demonstration/Performance Session on: Bilingual Co-
Teaching Model: Art Gallery Lessons as an Exploration of a Collaborative
Interdisciplinary Pedagogical Approach, American Educational Research Association
(AERA), Division K. April 29, San Antonio, Texas.

Pallais, D. Teaching Reading. Reflections from a Peruvian experience. Second Study
Tour—Project Amazon Reads/USAID. Austin, Texas. February, 20, 2017

Alvarado, F. & Pallais-Downing, D. Mediawiki as a tool for curriculum development
and open education resource alignment. Libre Learn Lab, 2016, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT), Tang Center, Cambridge, MA

Pallais, D. Contribuciones de un proyecto de educacion intercultural bilingte en la
Amazonia (Contributions of an intercultural bilingual project in the Amazon),
Proceedings of the XX/I Graduate Colloquium of Iberian and Latin American Languages
and Cultures: Held at The University of Texas at Austin March 24-26, 2016. Web

Pallais, D. A cross-language approach to support Spanish-speaking English-language
learners, 50 Annual International Conference on Learning Disabilities,
February 13-16, 2012, San Antonio, Texas.

Pallais, D. & Walker, K. Alternative Approaches for the Reading Difficulties of Spanish-
Speaking Children. Learning Disabilities Association of America 50th AnnualInternational Conference. Grand Hyatt Hotel, San Antonio, TX. February 15, 2013.
Conference Presentation.

Pallais, D. Teaching Reading to Spanish-Speaking Students, 49" Annual International
Conference on Learning Disabilities, February 2012, Chicago, Illinois.

Pallais, D. Instructional Scripts for First Grade Bilingual Classrooms, International
Dyslexia Association (IDA) 62" Annual Conference, November 2011, Chicago, Illinois.

Pallais, D. Managing RTI Campus Data - Monitoring Effectiveness of Intervention."
Learning Disabilities Association of America 50th Annual International Conference.
Grand Hyatt Hotel, San Antonio, TX. February 14, 2013. Conference Presentation.

Pallais, D. Resource for Monitoring Campus RTI Implementation: The RTI — Data
Management Tool (RTI-DMT), 33" International Conference on Learning Disabilities,
October 28, 2011, Austin, Texas.

Pallais, D. Componentes de la Lectura para una Instruccion Efectiva; La Respuesta a la
Intervencion, 11vo Congreso Latinoamericano sobre Lectura, August 2011, Managua,
Nicaragua.

Pallais, D. Reading Supports for Spanish-Speaking Students, Organization of Teacher
Educators in Reading (OTER), Annual Meeting, 55“ Annual Convention of the
International Reading Association, April 2010, Chicago, Illinois.

Pallais, D. Rutinas de Instruccion para Elevar la Calidad, Research Triangle Initiative
(RTI) Literacy Meeting, August 2009, Lima, Peru.

RESEARCH EXPERIENCE

2016 —2017
Co-principal investigator for the study: Spanish Heritage Learners: Linguistic
Patterns and Bilingual Language Acquisition in US College Students. Co-
authored research proposal and protocols, collected data and currently
analyzing the results for future journal submission.

2016-2017
Co-principal investigator for the study:Bilingual Co-Teaching Model: Art Gallery
Lessons as an Exploration of a Collaborative Interdisciplinary Pedagogical
Approach for Bilingual Pre-Service Teachers. Conducted a case study on two
teachers.2016
Ethnographic exploration in a dual-language classroom in Blazier
elementary school as part of a graduate-level class directed by Dr.
Claudia Cervantes-Soon.

2015-2017
Graduate research assistant for a study directed by Dr. Rebecca
Callahan: Design Technology and Engineering Education for English
Learner Students(DTEEL). Conducted a Funds of Knowledge Study in
Hutto.

2013-2015
Conducted case study research in Guatemala, Peru, Bolivia and Ecuador.
Examined policy documents, conducted interviews and visited schools
implementing bilingual initiatives in indigenous communities.

TEACHING AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCE

Fall 2017
Designed and implemented lessons with students who attend an after-school
program at Houston elementary school in the Austin area.

2016-2017
Designed and implemented group and individual lessons to support
formal Spanish development in prospective bilingual pre-service
teachers at the University of Texas at Austin.

2016-2017
Instructor. Undergraduate course: Spanish methods for writing in bilingual
classrooms.

2009
Guest Lecturer in the Department of Special Education, The University
of Texas at Austin: Fall 2009, Spring 2010, and Fall 2010.

2008
Designed and delivered a model intervention lesson that was
videotaped to support teaching Spanish-speaking students considered
at-risk in Laredo Independent School District.1998 - 1999
University lecturer in the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Nicaragua
(UNAN), Education Department.

1990-1996
Taught English and computer-assisted content and literacy instruction
to children as part of an innovative elementary school and in its an
after-school program.

SCHOLARSHIPS, HONORS AND AWARDS
Phi Betta Phi Academic Honor Society, 2000-Present, UT-Austin chapter.

Honor Standing, Graduate Program in Educational Psychology, 2000-2004, University of
Texas at Austin.

Silver plaque award given by the parent community of the school Lo Pequeno es Bello
(Small is Beautiful), for work done as a school leader and teacher during the period 1990-
1996, Managua, Nicaragua.

Honor mention for Masters thesis: Enriquecimiento Cognitivo para Ninos en el
Ordenador, University of Salamanca, Dic. 1997, Salamanca, Spain.

Scholarship awarded by the Institute of Iberoamerican Cooperation (ICI), Spanish
Agency for International Development, Foreign Ministry of Spain, 1996-1997, Madrid,
Spain.

SELECTED PROFFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE

2012 — 2015 Literacy and evaluation consultant for the Development Portfolio
Management Group (DPMG)/University of Southern California
(USC); the Meadows Center for Preventing Educational Risk, The
University of Texas at Austin; World Vision International/United States
Agency for International Development/Family Health International,
USAID/FHI 360.

2008 — 2013 Senior Field Trainer/Analyst for the Building Capacity for Response to
Intervention Project, Meadows Center for Preventing Educational Risk,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas.2004 — 2008 Statewide Coordinator for the Vaughn Gross Center for Reading and

1997 - 1999

1990 -1996

SERVICE

Language Arts, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas:

Curriculum, Training and Evaluation Consultant for the Academy for
Educational Development, (AED/USAID) Base Project, Managua,
Nicaragua.

School Director and Teacher. Founded, directed, taught and evaluated
the elementary school Lo Pequeno es Bello (Small is Beautiful), and its
associated after-school program serving children ages 3- 15, using
student-based methodologies and a technology-based curricular
innovation originated in the ideas of Seymour Pappert.

Journal reviewer: Reading and Writing Quarterly (2015, 2016) and
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition (2016)

Current Secretary of the board of the directors of the foundation Online
Learning Initiative, led by Dr. Felix Alvarado, to support curriculum
implementation in literacy in Latin America.

Past member of the Board of directors of the organization Nicaragua Lee
(Nicaragua Reads) September 2015-Summer 2016

Created vocabulary centers as part of a training for education leaders
conducted by the organization Save the Children, March-April, 2014.

Started a website with resources for bilingual educators in the United
States: http://lecturayescrituracooperativa.wordpress.com

Developed the Centro Intercultural de Lectura y Escritura (CILEES) to
support literacy collaboration in Latin America: http://cilees.org

Blog to Support Reading Instruction in Latin America. Network Support
for Book Drive benefitting three schools: “El Corozo”’,Matagalpa; “San
José de Ticuantepe’’, and “San Isidro de Bolas’, Managua, Dic. 2011,
Nicaragua.

Participation as a presenter at the 11 Latin American Congress on
Reading, August, 2011, Managua, Nicaragua.PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT-— SELECTED E-LEARNING PRODUCTS
CREATED

Spanish Centers for Kindergarten and First Grade

Using Data to Design Intervention in Middle School

The Response to Intervention (RTI) Data-Management Tool: A Toolkit for
School Leaders

Reading Support for Spanish-Speaking Students in Bilingual Classrooms
Implementing Response to Intervention: A “To Do” List for School
Leaders

Reading Center Lessons for Bilingual Classrooms

Scaffolding Strategies for Comprehension in the Bilingual Classroom
Instructional Routine Lessons in Comprehension

LANGUAGES

Native speaker of Spanish.
Reading knowledge of French.

REFERENCES

Dr. Cinthia Salinas
cssalinas@austin.utexas.edu
Department Chair

Curriculum and Instruction

The University of Texas at Austin

Dr. Deb Palmer

debpalmer@colorado.edu

Professor and Program Chair

Education equity & cultural diversity * Bueno Center
University of Colorado

Bouder, Colorado

Dr. Gwen Sullivan

Center for Writing Talent

Austin, Texas

Gwen Sullivan <centerforwritingtalent@gmail.com>