Curriculum Vitae

Gail K. Grabner, Ph.D.
12440 Riata Trace Circle, Apt 2128
Austin, TX 78727
Mobile: (512) 820-8789

EDUCATION

Doctor of Philosophy, Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
IL, 2002

Master of Science, Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL,
1995

Bachelor of Science, Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL,
1992.

ACADEMIC/TEACHING EXPERIENCE

Lecturer, University of Texas at Austin, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Austin, TX, August 2011 — Present

¢ Conduct lectures in biochemistry for CH 369

¢ Manage course web site.

¢ Assign and manage teaching assistants for course.

¢ Evaluate graduate teaching assistants assigned to course.

¢ Design and implement course policies.

¢ Compose questions for web-based assignments.

¢ Manage web-based student assignments.

¢ Prepare recommendation letters for students making application to gradate, medical,
and professional programs.

* Work with the Center for Teaching and Learning in implementing the PLUS
program for CH369

¢ Meet weekly with course PLUS preceptors to help guide study sessions

¢ Redesign and implement course polices to comply with the flipped model

Lecturer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, School of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Urbana, IL, January 2005 — June 2011

¢ Conduct lectures in microbiology and biochemistry.

¢ Personal instruction for undergraduate and graduate students in a laboratory setting.

¢ Manage course web site.

¢ Assign and manage teaching assistants for course.

¢ Evaluate graduate teaching assistants assigned to course.

¢ Recommend graduate teaching assistant(s) for departmental teaching awards.

¢ Radiation supervisor for laboratory course.

¢ Manage annual course budget, which includes equipment, supplies, and
miscellaneous expenses.

¢ Design and implement course policies.¢ Compose questions for web-based assignments and convert to html code.

¢ Manage web-based student assignments.

¢ Design and implement new experiments in microbiology and biochemistry.

¢ Write and edit course laboratory manuals.

¢ Preparatory bench work for laboratory course on bacterial and viral pathogens.

¢ Prepare recommendation letters for students making application to gradate, medical,
and professional programs.

¢ Prepare and oversee additional experiments and assignments for students in partial
completion of a James Scholar Honors program.

¢ Attend bimonthly meetings of the School of Molecular and Cellular Biology
instructional staff

Lecturer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Microbiology Department, Urbana,
IL, August 2002 — December 2004

¢ Teach undergraduate students.
¢ Evaluate graduate teaching assistants assigned to courses.
¢ Order supplies for microbiology laboratory course.

Visiting Lecturer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Biochemistry Department,
Urbana, IL, August 1998 — August 2001

¢ Teach undergraduate and graduate students.

¢ Assign and manage teaching assistants for course.

¢ Evaluate graduate teaching assistants assigned to course.

¢ Recommend graduate teaching assistant(s) for departmental teaching award.

¢ Radiation supervisor for laboratory course.

¢ Manage annual course budget, which includes equipment, supplies, and
miscellaneous expenses.

Graduate Teaching Assistant, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Biochemistry
Department, Urbana, IL, August 1994 —December 1994

¢ Teach undergraduate students in laboratory course.
¢ Prepare reagents and pre-run course experiments.
¢ Grade lab reports.

Graduate Teaching Assistant, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Biochemistry
Department, Urbana, IL, August 1992 —May 1993

¢ Teach undergraduate students.

¢ Attend weekly staff meeting for all teaching assistants.
¢ Proctor course exams.

¢ Prepare and grade weekly quizzes.

¢ Grade homework assignments.COURSES TAUGHT

Undergraduate

¢ CHEM101-TV: Introductory Chemistry Lecture

¢ CHEM102: Introductory Chemistry Lab

¢ BIOCHEM355/356: Advanced Biochemistry Lecture and Lab
¢ MCBIO 201/MCB 301: General Microbiology Lab for Majors
MCBIO328/MCB 428: Bacterial and Viral Pathogens Lab
MCBIO200/MCB 300: General Microbiology Lecture
BIOC455: Advanced Biochemistry Lab

* CH369: Fundamentals of Biochemistry

CONTRIBUTIONS to COURSE DEVELOPMENT

¢ Developed and modified experiments for MCB 301: General Microbiology Lab for
Majors.

¢ Designed and developed additional experiment for MCB 428: Bacterial and Viral
Pathogens Lab.

ACADEMIC HONORS AND AWARDS

¢ College of Liberal Arts and Sciences Outstanding Teaching Assistant Award,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1993-1994 (Chemistry).
¢ Teacher Ranked as Excellent, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
o Semesters ranked: Fall 2004 (Microbiology); Fall 2005 through Spring 2010
(Microbiology and Biochemistry).

PUBLICATIONS

¢ Turner, R.J., Bonner, E.R., Grabner, G.K., and Switzer, R.L.: “Purification and
Characterization of Bacillus subtilis PyrR, a Bifunctional pyr mRNA-binding
Attentuation Protein/Uracil Phosphoribosyltransferase,” Journal of Biological
Chemistry. Mar. 1998.

¢ Ghim, S.Y., and Kim, C.C., Bonner, E.R., D’Elia, J.N., Grabner, G.K., and Switzer,
R.L.: “The Enterococcus faecalis pyr Operon Is Regulated by Autogenous
Transcriptional Attenuation at a Single Site in the 5’ Leader,” Journal of
Bacteriology. Feb. 1999.

¢ Grabner, G.K., and Switzer, R.L.: “Kinetic Studies of the Uracil
Phosphoribosyltransferase Reaction Catalyzed by the Bacillus subtilis Pyrimidine
Attenuation Regulatory Protein PyrR,” Journal of Biological Chemistry. December,
2002.

¢ Chander, R., Halbig, K.M., Miller, J.K., Fields, C.J., Bonner, H.K.S., Grabner, G.K.,
Switzer, R.L., and Smith, J.L.: “Structure of the Nucleotide Complex of PyrR, the pyr
Attenuation Protein from Bacillus caldolyticus, Suggests Dual Regulation by
Pyrimidine and Purine Nucleotides,” Journal of Bacteriology. Mar. 2005SERVICE -- UNIVERSITY

¢ Member, MCB Distinction Committee, 2004 - Present

¢ Teaching Assistant Coordinator, 2002 — Present

¢ Awarder and Presenter of Annual Francis Clark Award for Outstanding Microbiology
Teaching Assistant, 2002 — Present

¢ Presenter of Annual Teaching Awards, 2002 — Present

REFERENCES

Available upon request.