EF321 @ Shakespeare: Selected Plays

Instructor: Kornhaber, David Flags: Global Cultures
Unique #: 79750 Restrictions: n/a
Semester: Summer 2020, first session Computer Instruction: Yes

Cross-lists: n/a
Time and Location: Internet
Prerequisites: Nine semester hours of coursework in English or rhetoric and writing

Description: This course offers an introduction to some of Shakespeare’s major plays with a particular focus on their place within
the theatrical culture of early modern England and within theatre history more generally. Students can expect to receive a
grounding in the history of staging and production practices in Elizabethan and Jacobean England and to consider Shakespeare’s
work in light of their engagement with contemporary theatrical traditions. Students will also consider how some of Shakespeare’s
key works have been adapted to changing theatrical mores by leading actors and directors of the eighteenth, nineteenth, and
twentieth centuries. Key questions to be considered include how Shakespeare’s works engage with issues of dramatic genre, how
they deploy and play with aspects of theatrical craft and technique, and how they engage with the issues of theatricality and
metatheatricality alongside other concerns. Students will also begin to consider in what ways Shakespeare’s works sustain
adaptation to changing theatrical traditions and in what ways new production approaches can recast the plays themselves.

Texts: William Shakespeare. The Arden Shakespeare Complete Works. Ed. Ann Thompson, David Scott Katstan, Richard Proudfoot.
London: Bloomsbury Arden Shakespeare, 2011.

Please note: The above is a suggested edition of the required text. Alternate editions may be acceptable. Please consult me for
further guidance.

Requirements & Grading: 1) Weekly quizzes, 15%; 2) Discussion participation 15%; 3) Midterm exam, 35%; 4) Final exam, 35%

Schedule:
Week Day Date Assignment/Event
1 TH 6/4 Introduction
F 6/5 Shakespeare’s Theatre
2 M 6/8 Midsummer Night’s Dream
T 6/9 Midsummer Night’s Dream
W 6/10 Midsummer Night’s Dream
TH 6/11 Midsummer Night’s Dream
F 6/12 Online Discussion
3 M 6/15 Henry IV Part 1
T 6/16 Henry IV Part 1
W 6/17 Henry IV Part 1
TH 6/18 Henry IV Part 1
F 6/19 Online Discussion Midterm exam assigned
4 MI 6/22 Hamlet Midterm exam due
T 6/23 Hamlet
W 6/24 Hamlet
TH 6/25 Hamlet
F 6/26 Online Discussion
5 M 6/29 Twelfth Night
T 6/30 Twelfth Night
W 7/1 Twelfth Night
TH 7/2 Twelfth Night
F 7/3 Online Discussion6 M 7/6 The Tempest
T 7/7 The Tempest
W 7/8 The Tempest
TH 7/9 Online Discussion Last class day; Final exam assigned
M 7/13 --- Final exam due
Policies:

Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
232-2937 (video phone), or visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.

Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.

Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work. For
additional information on Academic Integrity, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint. php.

Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, | will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.

Late Assignments Policy: Assignments are due on Canvas by 5pm on the dates listed in the Schedule unless otherwise rescheduled by
the instructor. If you are absent on the day that an assignment is due, you must submit it via email by class time on that day for it

not to be considered late. Unless arrangements for an extension are made in advance with the instructor, late assignments will be
marked down 1/3 of a letter for every day they are late.

Flag Statement:

This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups
outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.

Web Site: A Canvas site will be available for this course.

Instructor:

David Kornhaber
Online office hours: by appointment

Teaching Assistant: