Curriculum Vitae

Michael Lynn Garrison,
Professor of Architecture, 2005-2018

Cass Gilbert Centennial Teaching Fellowship in Architecture

SBSE: Society of Building Science Educators
[ALD: International Institute of Lighting Designers
FT|: Fagade Tectonics Institute-Academic

Teaching Fall 2017-2 Spring 018

Course score Instructor score
Arc 520F Fall 2017 Intermediate Studio III 4.0 4.2
Arc 327G Fall 2017 Regenerative Architecture 44 44
Arc 386M Fall 2017 Regenerative Architecture 44 44
Arc 334L Spr 2018 Environmental Controls II 3.2 3.4
Arc 561C Spr 2018 Comprehensive Studio 4.7 4.7
Advising

sara Motamedi, PhD Sustainable Design, the University of Texas at Austin, Summer 2017
Asmita Dahl, Candidate for MS in Sustainable Design: thesis committee 2018-
Yasser El Masri, Candidate for MS in Sustainable Design, Fulbright Scholar: independent study 2018-

Research/Scholarship/Critical Practice

Monograph:

NCARB 07 Building Envelopes Monograph, by Michael Garrison, 390 pages
National Council of Architectural Registration Boards

Washington, D.C. Draft 2017, Final Draft Approval 2018, Graphics Approval 2019

Research Grant Submitted:

“The design and analysis of a prefabricated modular fiber reinforced polymer composite housing prototype,”
ExxonMobil Upstream Company and UTEI, $200,000 for two years, Michael Garrison, School of
Architecture, Principal Investigator, Dr. Wei Li, Professor of Mechanical and Manufacturing Systems
Engineering, Co-Investigator, Billie Faircloth, Partner and Research Director, Kieran Timberlake Architects,
Sept. 2018-Sept. 2020. ExxonMobil request another proposal from Garrison and Li for a $40,000 grant,
“Life Cycle Assessment of FRP Polymer Building Materials,” In association with The University of Texas at
Austin Solar Decathlon (Design Challenge) Competition (Formerly known as the Race to Zero Student
Design Competition, U.S. Department of Energy), approval is pending.

Research Grant being developed
1. SOLTex Rowhouses, Urban Attached Zero Net Energy Design, U.S. Solar Decathlon House
(Design Challenge) Competition, U.S. Department of Energy and the National Renewable Energy
Lab. 2018.
2. TEXSun Techo, ZNE Accessory Dwelling Unit Design, U.S. Solar Decathlon (Design Challenge),
U.S. Department of Energy and the National Renewable Energy Lab. 2018.
3. Smile Africa School Classrooms, with Asmita Dahl, Hope4Kids, Tororo, Uganda, 2018Service

Awards Program

Jury Members: Brigham Keehiner AIA, New York, NY. Michael Garrison and Robert Golde, ASLA , New
Haven CT: 2018 Tucker Design Awards, National Stone Institute, Presentation of the Awards and the
Bybee Award, Tobin Center, February 2018.

School Committees

UTSOA Executive Committee 2017-2018 (Sevilla teaching review, Lara service review)
UTSOA Graduate Studies Committee 2017-2018

MSSD Reviews, Graduate Portfolio Reviews, Undergraduate Portfolio Reviews, 2017-2018
UTSOA ACSA Faculty Councilor, 2017-2018

University Committees

University Capital Committee, 2017-2018

Campus Master Planning Committee, 2017-2018

East Campus Graduate Housing Building Committee, 2017-2018

Faculty Building Advisory Committee, 2017-2018

Faculty Affiliate, University of Texas at Austin Energy Institute, 2017-2018
Flag Committee, Independent Studies, Undergraduate Studies 2017

Academic Committees and International Conference Committees

1. Advanced Building Skins: Conference Committee, (Review papers, Session chair), 13"
Conference on Advanced Building Skins, European Energy Forum, Bern, Switzerland, October
2017.

2. International Scientific Committee, Eco-Architecture, 2018, 7'" International Conference on
Harmonization between Architecture and Nature, (Review papers, Session Chair), WIT: Wessex
Institute of Technology, New Forest, UK, 2018.

3. Paper Review, Jeana D'Agostino Ripple, Performance Based Simulations for Membrane based
Enclosures, Measured, TAD: Technology Architecture + Design, Volume 2, Spring 2017.

4. International Advisory Committee, (Review papers), Grand Renewable Energy International
Conference and Exhibition, Yokohama, Japan, 2018.

External Service

At the request of Dean Deborah Berke, Yale School of Architecture, the review, evaluation and a letter in
support of Professor Anna Dyson, Hines Professor of Sustainable Architectural Design and the Yale School
of Forestry and Environmental Studies, in consideration for promotion with tenure.

Public Service
Advisory board member, Community Renewal International, Washington D.C
National Stone Council NSC Building Code Development CommitteeContributions

TEACHING

My most significant contributions to the School and the Academy are in the realm of teaching architectural
design as a process that describes the confluence between architectural technology and architectural design.
My design studio emphasizes how the performance and the integration of environmental control systems,
envelope systems, spatial and building systems effects and informs architectural design. The value of my
emphasis on design/technology integration is supported by strong student interest in my studio and the high-
level d of studio project achievement.

My design practice and my student advising with MS Sustainable Design thesis students, search grants,
publications and collaborations in Green Building insure that my teaching remains at the cutting edge.

| teach a Regenerative Architecture lecture course that unites graduate sustainable architecture, landscape
and planning students, engineering students, business students that support the topics of our graduate
program in Sustainable Design. | also teach the Environmental Controls II required undergraduate course to
6/7 students. The course evaluations are below my other courses as | continue to try to improve this course
to the interior architecture students who desire a more focused interiors study in Environmental Controls
Technology.

SCHOLARSHIP

Although | have published basic research papers on Mean Radiant Cooling and was an early investigator in
double box building configurations my significant scholarship is in the area of applied science in green
building design. have consistently over my tenure at the UTSOA published papers at national and regional
conferences, Plea, ACSA, AIA, SBSE, WIT, ISES, ABS, etc. | have an accomplished record of design build
Studios at: Big Bend National Park, McDonald Observatory, Four Solar Decathlon Projects, Tororo, Uganda,
and the Rio Grande Valley. My students have won national design competitions and | have a lengthy record
of funded grants and research in green building design.

During this past academic year my contribution in scholarship has been in finishing the graphics for the
publication of the NCARB 07 Building Envelopes, including the preparation of the exam questions for the
National Council of Architectural Accreditation Board. In 2005, | co-authored with the late Randal Stout,
NCARB Monograph exploring building envelope architectural technology. Because of the positive review of
that monograph NCARB asked me to write another one and it has occupied my research interest for most of
the past three years.

SERVICE

Because of my community service as past chair of the City of Austin’s Resource Management Commission
ata time when we were just starting to envision the Austin Green Building Program and as a founding member
of the Austin Downtown Commission | have always been involved in building community consensus. | been
this past year involved in several University Planning and Building Committee. The most time consuming
continues to be the East Campus Student Housing Project. No doubt my service on these committee came
from my long-time service on The University Committee on Energy Conservation and Management. And my
service as an Advisory Committee member on several international energy and green building conferences.
| continue to network with the top environmental design researchers around the world.TRANSFORMATIVE CONTRBUTIONS

1.

SOLTex Rowhouses, Urban Attached Zero Net Energy Design, U.S. Solar Decathlon House (Design
Challenge) Competition, U.S. Department of Energy and the National Renewable Energy Lab. 2018.
This project which developed from my Regenerative Architecture interactive lecture class, has been
the result of a joint collaboration from our graduate MS students in Sustainable Design, engineering
students and business students. The SOLTex rowhouse design combines the principles of design
shape geometry and form, microclimate configuration and the integration of energy-efficiency,
energy and water-collecting surfaces, lower-cost prefab modular construction and low embodied
energy-use materials to demonstrate transformative architectural technologies in green building
design and operation. This work also demonstrates new ideas in middle density, affordability, social
cohesion and spatial equality questions that have generated sustainable design thesis topics for our
students.

TEXSun Techo, ZNE Accessory Dwelling Unit Design, U.S. Solar Decathlon (Design Challenge),
U.S. Department of Energy and the National Renewable Energy Lab. 2018. Another student design
project that evolved from investigations in my Regenerative Architecture interactive lecture class is
the TEXSun-Techo (Techo is the Spanish word for roof canopy) house design demonstrates an
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) home that combines Zero Net Energy (ZNE), water harvesting, and
low embodied energy building materials, with affordability and neighborhood gentrification mitigation.
Building off of the past UTSOA “Alley Flats,” students have built a network with other schools at UT
and are competing with 81 other U.S. universities in the design competition. This work has unified
the MS in Sustainable Design graduate students.

| submitted a grant proposal in the fall to ExxonMobil Upstream Company and UTEI with Mechanical
Engineering Professor Wei Li, as a co-Investigator, with Billie Faircloth, Partner and Research
Director, Kieran Timberlake Architects, as a consultant. ExxonMobil has requested another proposal
from us on a, “Life Cycle Assessment of FRP Polymer Building Materials.” The grant is pending and
if successful the grant will support a graduate research assistant who wants to concentrate on
comparing Life Cycle assessments of new exterior building materials. Funded graduate research
positions are critical to attract the best students for our graduate program in Sustainable Design and
| will continue to investigate opportunities for research.