The University of Texas at Austin

Texas McCombs Business Foundations

McCombs School of Business

 

Online
MKT 320F: Summer 2020, Unique Number 71975
Title: Foundations of Marketing
Instructor: Dr. Chandra Srivastava
Email: cnsrivastava@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Select Tuesdays from 6-7 pm CST (see Course Schedule) and by

appointment

Please note: The Canvas website for this class is the main source for important course information
including announcements, updates to the course schedule, assignments, etc.

e Please enable Canvas notifications so you will be aware of important announcements,
discussions, and grade posts.

e Also, please use the Canvas messaging feature for communications relating to this course, as |
check it daily and will respond promptly. Email sent from Gmail or Yahoo or other such accounts
sometimes gets filtered out as spam.

Course Description: The primary objective of this course is to introduce you to the fundamental
concepts, practices, and tools of marketing. As we will quickly learn in class, “marketing” is not just for
marketing majors. It is not simply a function or a department. Instead, marketing is a process which
allows an organization to create and deliver value for customers — hopefully more value than
competitors offer — and therefore provides the engine for organic growth of an organization. No matter
what field you study in college and what career you eventually pursue, your success in business will be
largely determined by your ability to deliver more value to customers than your competitors.

More specifically, in this class you will have the opportunity to:

e Understand the role of the marketing in creating value and driving firm growth,

e Understand the key elements of strategy - Segmentation, Targeting and Positioning — so that
you are able to craft an appropriate marketing strategy,

e Learn the “4P’s” (product, price, place and promotion) and how those elements can be
combined to deliver value to customers,

e Become conversant in the language and concepts of marketing so you are able to
confidently discuss marketing issues and communicate your ideas,

e Become familiar with recent developments and trends in the field of marketing such as
social media.

1]/Foundations of MarketingCourse Outcomes: Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to:

e Explain the evolution of the marketing concept, including the historical context of changes in
the concepts of marketing and the role that marketing currently plays in the interaction
between business and society.

e Demonstrate an understanding of business strategy options within an organization and
connect it to the development of marketing strategy.

e Apply the basic framework of the marketing process, including the situation analysis (3 Cs),
market strategy development (STP), and marketing mix decisions (4 Ps), to key issues that
marketers encounter in implementing marketing strategy.

e Demonstrate an understanding of the value, use, and implications of market research using
common tools and methods as part of a critical analysis of a marketing situation.

e Evaluate marketing decisions and their potential business impacts using key marketing
terminology, tools, and tactics.

Course Materials: Access to all course materials and assignments is via Canvas.

Via links in Canvas, you will need to purchase the textbook (ebook) and a supplementary reading
(download PDF):

e Textbook: MKT": Principles of Marketing by Lamb, Hair, & McDaniel (Cengage
Learning). Note: You do not need to access the textbook’s additional online resources

(MindTap) but may do so if you wish.

e Handout: Note on Marketing Arithmetic and Related Marketing Terms, by Star, Heskett,
and Levitt (Harvard Business Publishing).

Live Class Sessions : On select Tuesdays (see Course Schedule), | will hold an optional live class session
(lasting approximately 60 minutes) online via Zoom starting at 6 pm CST. Because this class time may
conflict with some students’ schedules, attendance is not mandatory and the session will be recorded
and uploaded to Canvas for future on-demand viewing by students who are unable to attend. These class
sessions will review additional content that will be covered in the exams but is not covered in the Canvas
course units.

Evaluation & Grading: Grades will follow the plus/minus system with these cut-offs. A: 93-100, A-:
90-92, B+: 87-89, B: 83-86, B-: 80-82, C+: 77-79, C: 73-76, C-: 70-72, D+: 67-69, D: 63-66, D-: 60-62,
F: 59 or lower. Decimals will be not be rounded up — an 89.7 average will earn a B+, not an A-.

Your grade in the course will be a function of multiple assessments designed to encourage knowledge
and application of key concepts:

Reading Checks Throughout course 35%
Discussions Throughout course 4%
Practice Activities Throughout course 11%
Exam #1 Friday July 7 25%
Exam #2 Friday August 14 25%

2|Foundations of MarketingReading Checks (35% of final grade): Throughout the course, there are 22 brief reading check
quizzes based on the unit readings and activities you complete. Each contains a few (2 to 6)
multiple-choice or true and false questions. Start the quizzes after you have completed and
thoroughly reviewed all of the unit content and are comfortable with the concepts. Although
these quizzes are “open book,” you are highly encouraged to attempt them on your own as they
serve as important practice for the exams.

Discussions (4% of final grade): During the course you will have the opportunity to express
your thoughts and interact with other classmates using polls, discussion forums, and video
activities. Students are encouraged to complete these assignments individually, and then to
review other students’ responses.

Practice Activities (11% of final grade): Practice activities will help you understand and
apply the content covered in each of the lessons within a unit. These activities come in
several forms including multiple-choice questions and written responses. All 23 assignments
are graded on a Complete/Incomplete basis, and the percentage complete will be the basis
for this grade component.

Exams (50% of final grade): There will be two exams, each comprising 25% of your course
grade. The first exam will cover Units 1, 2, 3, and 8 and the second exam will cover Units 4, 5,
6, 7, and 9. All exams will be “closed note” and “closed-book”. The exam should take
approximately 1 hour to complete, but you will be given two hours. Exams must be taken on the
scheduled date.

The exams will be taken online through Canvas and monitored via a proctoring service. It is
required that you complete a test of the proctoring software before beginning the class, so you
can contact technical support if needed (see the Getting Started module on Canvas). The normal
time limit is one hour but two hours are allocated for those needing extra time (i.e. SSD
accommodations).

e Computer set-up for remote proctoring of exams
- High speed Internet (.7 mb download and .3 mb upload)
- Web camera (built in or external) with microphone
- Laptop or desktop (smartphone/tablet insufficient)
- Government issued photo ID (UT student ID, driver’s license, passport, military ID)

Please make sure you follow these exam proctor policies:

e Make sure your phone or other digital device (including smart watch) is not on your person
or out in the room where you are taking the exam (a desk drawer or backpack is a good
storage place)

e Keep your eyes on the monitor/screen, don't stare to your right/left since that can generate
an exam proctor violation

e No headphones, earphones, radio, or TV

e Donot leave the room or stand up from your chair during the exam

e Take the exam where you will not be disturbed - no other people can be in the room with
you during the exam

3|Foundations of Marketinge Work at a desk where the webcam can see your head and torso and the room behind you
(avoid using a laptop while sitting on a bed or on the floor since the webcam can't see
enough to verify the environment)

ProctorU is the remote proctoring service used to monitor exams. It is a live, online proctoring
service that allows you to take your exam from the comfort of your home or office. The fee for
ProctorU’s services is included in your course materials fee. However, any on-demand
scheduling fees will be the student’s responsibility to pay. ProctorU is available 24/7, however
there are two important rules to remember:

1. You will need to schedule your exam proctoring session at least 72 hours in advance to
avoid any on-demand scheduling fees.

2. The last available exam appointment will be at 9:00pm (CST) on the due date — you will
not be allowed to start the exam later than that.

ProctorU also provides free technical support to ensure you have the best testing situation
possible. You can access the “How It Works” ProctorU manual on Canvas (see About This Course
module). Support is also available at www.proctoru.com/testitout . On this page you will also be
able to learn about what to expect during your proctoring session and ask any questions you may
have about the proctoring process with a ProctorU representative. For additional technical
services needed before your exam, you can click on the button that says “connect to a live

person.” Test Taker Walk Through Video url: https://vimeo.com/107066503

Late Assignments Policy: Assignments are due at designated times as outlined on the course
schedule. Unfortunately, assessments submitted after the due date and time will not be counted.

Given that there are no extensions and no makeup assignments, please leave sufficient time to
complete the prerequisite activities and the corresponding assessments. It is a good idea to work at

least a day or two ahead of these deadlines to anticipate unforeseen emergencies and technical
difficulties.

Extra Credit Opportunities: You can earn one extra credit point in the course by participating ina
research study through the Marketing Department Subject Pool. You will receive this credit for any extra
credit opportunities offered via the Marketing Department Subject Pool website at:

http://mccombs.sona-systems.com

You should receive an email with your login information by June 10th. If you have any questions, please
email Larissa Garcia, the Behavioral Lab Coordinator, at larissa.garcia@mccombs.utexas.edu.

 

You are strongly encouraged to participate in these studies. It is a good way to get exposed to
marketing research, and it is valuable to understanding marketing and consumer behavior. These
opportunities are offered throughout the semester, but will end before July 3rd, so plan ahead.

Instructor Bio: | grew up in Austin, TX and earned my BA degrees in Economics and History from the

University of Texas at Austin. After college, | worked for five years at HilltKnowlton Strategies
conducting market research for a wide a variety of clients all over the world from Fortune 50 firms to

4|Foundations of Marketinglocal non-profits. A majority of my consulting work focused on corporate crisis management,
stakeholder management, messaging, and long-term corporate reputation management.

| went back to UT and earned my Ph.D. in Marketing at the McCombs School of Business. As a
researcher, | like to investigate questions related to marketing strategy and leadership. Specifically, my
most recent work investigates the influence of female representation in the C-suite on the marketing
strategy and customer orientation as well as factors that impact leadership decision-making during
social media crises.

| keep busy outside of class with consulting engagements, including acting as marketing counsel to some
early stage start-ups. In my spare time, | like to ride horses, bike, cook (which is more attempted than
succeeded), travel, do yoga, and read (especially Harry Potter).

Course Schedule
The schedule below highlights key dates for exams, optional class sessions, and office hours. Following
this schedule will ensure you complete the course on time. Please feel free to move through the

course more quickly than these deadlines, but you must complete the assignments by the required
due dates to receive credit.

Important Dates Modules Due

Off at 6 pm
Started by 11:55 pm
Concept by 11:55 pm
pe

June 16 Office Hours from 6-7 pm

Day

June 19 ee Complete Unit 2: Marketing Environment and
Buyer Behavior by 11:55 pm
Marketing at 6 pm
Friday June 26 Complete Unit 3: Building Marketing Strategy
cere tuansteoyaasspm
Tuesday June 30 Live Class Session
Teeey [eee poiewtoreomin
July 3 ee Complete “Unit 8: Qualitative and Quantitative
Marketing Research” by 11:55 pm
July7 [Exam gf
July 12 ee Complete “Unit 4: Developing and Managing
Products and Services” by 11:55 pm

July14__| Office Hours ee
Friday July 17 Complete “Unit 5: Developing and Managing
the Value Chain” by 11:55 pm

Tuesday July 21 Live Class Session: B2B
marketing and Personal
Selling

S5|]Foundations of MarketingFriday July 24 Complete “Unit 6: Managing Integrated
Marketing Communications” by 11:55 pm
July 28__| Office Hours

Friday July 31 Complete “Unit 7: Developing and Managing
Pricing Decisions” by 11:55 pm

a ee Complete “Unit 9: Marketing Past, Present and
Future” by 11:55 pm
Review for Exam #2
pe

August 14

Tuesday August 4 Live Class Session: Digital
and Social Media

 

Important Notifications

Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,

http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.

Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by
this course, that students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students
bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and
benefit to all students. Please come to me at any time with any concerns.

Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.

Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described
in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, | have agreed to
observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed
to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the
integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic

6|Foundations of MarketingIntegrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what

constitutes scholastic dishonesty.

Academic Integrity
Students of the University of Texas and this course may not share or distribute materials
that could be an advantage to another current or future student, and the university has no
tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. More on UT’s policy of Academic Dishonesty

and Cheating here: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/facultyresources.php

7| Foundations of Marketing