J317 JOURNALISM PRACTICES
Summer 2020

School of Journalism
University of Texas at Austin

Timeline: June 4-July 9, with recorded lectures from 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Central. See course
calendar below for live lecture days.

Instructor: Mallary Tenore

Zoom office hours: Any weekday, by appointment

Cell and text: 727.517.5489

Preferred email: mallary.tenore@utexas.edu

Twitter: @MallaryTenore

COURSE DESCRIPTION

This course teaches you how to be a more effective communicator by teaching you how to think,
report, and write like a journalist. Although the course emphasizes journalistic newsgathering and
writing, the skills are crucial to success in public relations as well as many other disciplines. You will
learn the core skills of news judgement and ethics, basic reporting, news writing, interviewing, and
covering a diverse array of stories.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of the course, J317 students will:

1. Understand the connections and differences between journalism and PR, and why it matters.

Recognize the difference between hard news and news features.

Evaluate the information gathered to choose what's newsy, relevant and important.

Identify and find credible and diverse sources.

Conduct meaningful interviews, including asking smart questions.

Verify information from the internet, documents and interviews.

Incorporate current and historical events and information into reporting and writing for necessary

context.

8. Produce newsworthy stories through original reporting and writing.

9. Write clear, well organized, interesting news stories that adhere to AP style.

10. Incorporate revision and editing to rid copy of factual and grammatical errors as well as
redundancies, clichés and ambiguities.

NOOR ON

HOW TO SUCCEED IN J317

Read news. Reading news stories will help you learn about reporting and writing — including how to
structure stories, how to write strong leads, how to effectively use quotes, AP style, and more. Find a
couple of writers whose work you really admire and then follow them on Twitter and on the sites
where their work is published. These writers can act as a source of inspiration.

Be curious. Being curious leads to better stories, better reporting and more fun! If something or
someone interests you, seek more information. Often, the details and questions that pique your
curiosity are the seeds of stories that you should pursue. Cultivate that curiosity.Seek feedback from your professor. Especially during this time of remote learning, it’s important to
reach out to your professor for feedback on your stories and/or if you have any questions about
assignments, quizzes, etc. If you don’t understand something, seek clarification.

Keep up with the recorded lectures day to day. Create a game-plan for keeping up with the
recorded lectures. Don't wait until Friday of each week to watch them. Instead, watch them each day
so that you can stay connected. Each lecture will build off the next, so it’s critical that you watch the
recorded lectures leading up to the live lectures.

Seek assistance. The Moody Writing Support Program is more than a writing aid — the program
helps students understand what makes a good story and how to pursue it. The program's robust
journalism coaching is an asset for J317 students and designed to help them excel in the course.
That’s why you are required to take your stories there for consultation with a writing coach.
Summer hours are Monday through Friday from 10:30 a.m.- 3 p.m. or by appointment. Visit
http://sites. utexas.edu/moodywriting/journalism/

to book your appointments. If you cannot find something that fits your schedule, email
moodywriting@austin.utexas.edu.

 

REQUIRED MATERIALS:

Read, listen and watch the news on various platforms: digital, hard copy newspapers, radio and

television. Sign up for news alerts and follow established news media outlets on social media. The

following materials are required:

e ONLINE subscription to The Associated Press Stylebook, www.apstylebook.com

e All information on Canvas, as well as class handouts.

e AsaUT student, you have access to the digital Austin American-Statesman. Read it every
morning so that you can stay abreast of day to day news. Log in here:
http://nieonline.com/austin/studentconnect.cfm

User name: utjourno Password: utjourno

COURSE ASSESSMENTS

Core components of this course are the writing assignments, complemented by the Take 10
assignments and the quizzes. Story assignments are to be completed outside of class, but each
assignment will be discussed during lectures. Assignments may be added or dropped as needed.

GRADING

Your work is evaluated based on professional standards, including newsworthiness, research and
Original reporting, story structure, and mechanics (grammar, spelling and punctuation, and AP Style).
Grading rubrics will be posted on Canvas. The instructor may use plus and minus grades, following
this range:

A: 94-100
A-minus: 90-93.99
B-plus: 87-89.99
B: 84-86.99
B-minus: 80-83.99
C-plus: 77-77.99
C: 74-76.99
C-minus: 70-73.99
D: 60-69.99

F: 59 and lowerGrading Breakdown

e 65%: Story assignments. You will complete three stories, described in greater detail under
the “Story Assignments” section.

e 15%: Participation. Attending and participating in the live lectures is critical. Meeting with
and/or reaching out to Professor Tenore to ask questions and seek feedback on assignments
also contributes to your participation grade.

e 10%: Quizzes. Four quizzes will test your knowledge of AP Style.

e 10%: Take 10 assignments: This weekly assignment will give you the opportunity to recap
and reflect on what you've learned each week. You'll be asked to write 10 bulleted takeaways
(two to three sentences each) from both the recorded and live lectures each week.

STORY ASSIGNMENTS
During this class, you will write three stories. The following is a brief description of each.

Story 1: Online event story (20%). You'll watch a recent Webinar and report on it. You should quote
at least two people who spoke in the Webinar and do two interviews: one with someone who helped
organize the Webinar and one with an expert on the topic discussed in the Webinar. (600 to 800
words)

Story 2: Profile piece (20%). You will be given the names of reputable journalists and each student
in the class can sign up to interview one of these journalists. You'll interview the journalist and write a
profile piece, with a focus on their work as a journalist and how, if at all, it has changed during the
pandemic. (600 to 800 words)

Story 3: Feature story (25%). You will write a reported feature story OR a well-sourced personal
essay related to a topic that interests you. The feature story should include at least three interviews
and the personal essay should include at least three sources from reputable sites. (750 to 1,000
words)

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ABOUT STORY ASSIGNMENTS

e You will be required to pitch your story ideas prior to pursuing each of these stories. A form is
available in Canvas for you to fill out and submit on or before the deadline indicated in the
course calendar.

e All stories are submitted as Canvas assignments via a Word doc file (.doc or .docx) or .pages.
Please do not submit .pdf file tyoes or Google Docs links.

e Puta working headline and byline on every draft and story. Failure to do so is considered a
reporting hole (missing information that diminishes a story) and will cost you points.

e Avoid conflicts of interest in which you have a vested interest in the people, groups, events or
organizations that you might cover — and what could be perceived as conflicts of interest. Do
not pitch stories that potentially contain a conflict of interest (unless an exception is noted).
Potential conflicts of interest include (but are not limited to) friends, family members, and
roommates. When in doubt about a potential conflict of interest, ask Professor Tenore as soon
as possible.

e Graded story assignments must be accompanied with a cover sheet (template is on Canvas).
Failure to include a cover sheet is considered a reporting hole and will cost you points. The
cover sheet includes:

o Your name, the story assignment and the date
o Story slug (one- or two-word description used by newsrooms to distinguish stories)
o The “budget line” or a one- or two-sentence description of the storyo A list of names of sources you interviewed (quoted and unquoted), phone numbers
and/or e-mail addresses

Late Work: Deadlines are critical in journalism. Don’t miss them. Late stories will automatically be
docked at least one letter grade.

ATTENDANCE

Attendance is required and will be taken. Live lectures (which are noted in the course calendar) will
begin promptly at 11 a.m. Central. Attendance includes arriving to live lectures on time and staying for
the entire lecture. Attendance points cannot be made up at another time. If you cannot attend a live
lecture, you must communicate this to Professor Tenore at least one week prior to the lecture.
Attendance will be assessed based on your presence and active participation in live lectures, along
with your willingness to seek input from your professor outside of class.

TECHNOLOGY

Canvas: This web-based course management system with password-protected access at
http://canvas.utexas.edu/ —is used to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate
online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and for online quizzes and surveys. It is required for
this course. You can see Canvas tutorials here:
httos://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials

Zoom: Zoom is required for this course, as all recorded and live lectures will be done via Zoom. To
successfully access the Zoom lectures, you need to claim your free UT Zoom account by going to
utexas.zoom.us and registering. This is done by clicking on Sign In. You cannot use any other Zoom
account to access this class. Per UT's Zoom security settings, you must also download and register
the Zoom app on all your devices (including computers). The Zoom app is available in the Apple App
Store and in the Google Play store for Android. The desktop app can be downloaded at
utexas.zoom.us by following the Download Client \ink at bottom of the opening screen, and then
downloading Zoom Client for Meetings.

Here is the link where you can access all live lectures for this course:
https://utexas.zoom.us/meeting/register/tUOpc-ihpjgonG9Bo7ep-q3accJI TIO TAOMPr (Meeting ID
994-41 9-83314). After registering, you will receive a confirmation email containing information about
joining the meeting.

Using Email for Official Correspondence: Email is recognized as an official mode of university
correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your email for university and course-
related information and announcements. You are responsible for keeping the university informed
about changes to your email address. You should check your email regularly and frequently—to stay
current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT
Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http:/Awww.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.

Slack: The class will have its own Slack workspace as a place where students can converse with one
another and/or the professor. The Slack workspace is intended to be an informal mode of
communication and a way to stay connected in this online class. Students are encouraged, but not
required, to join the workspace. Any important class-related information that the professor shares on
Slack will first be shared on Canvas.

UNIVERSITY HONOR CODE AND ACADEMIC DISHONESTYUniversity of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning,
discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity and responsibility. Each member of the
university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness and respect
toward peers and community.

Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating,
plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid
participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited
to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test,
quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses
without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these
guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning
experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate UT rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from UT. For details see:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/s|s/acint_student.php.

 

Plagiarism and Academic Dishonesty: In regard to journalism and J317, academic dishonesty
includes:

e Plagiarizing or using another media source's, individual’s or your own (in part or in whole) work
and representing it as new for this class. If you’ve done or started the work in another class,
you must inform your instructor before pitching the story.

Pitching or turning in an assignment from a previous class without instructor permission.
Making up quotes, sources and facts.

Not interviewing people who appear in your stories.

Not giving appropriate attribution or citation of a source or background information. In this
class, you will learn how to properly attribute information.

e Cheating during a quiz or any assignment, graded or not

GENERAL GUIDELINES AND RESOURCES
The university has numerous resources to aid and support students. Use these to help you succeed
in your classes and life.

Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an important
step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or
anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support. For immediate support:
e Contact the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) at 512-471-3515 |
|cmhc.utexas.edu
e CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.himl

CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW | 512-471-7642
(Please leave a message if she is unavailable.)

FREE Services at CMHC:
e Brief assessments and referral services
e Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.htm|
e MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.himl
e Virtual classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.htm|Students Needing Accommodations: Please notify me of any modification/adaptation you may
require to accommodate a disability-related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to
the Dean of Student's Office so that the most appropriate accommodations can be determined.
Specialized services are available on campus through Services for Students with Disabilities. For
more information, visit http:/www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/

Q drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
academic reasons to six (6).

Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin: The University of Texas has numerous resources for
students to provide support for your learning, including: The UT Learning Center:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/ Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/

ITS: Need help with technology? Go to http://www.utexas.edu/its/

Libraries: Need help searching for information? htip://www.lib.utexas.edu/

IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION

Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of
fellow students, TAs or instructors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050.
Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right — it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts
and share your concerns. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the
Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP) and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Again, call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.

Student Emergency Services: htip://deanofsiudents.utexas.edu/emergency/

J317 Journalism Practices Calendar

All lectures & workshops led by Professor Tenore, unless otherwise indicated. All live components will
take place from 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. CST, via Zoom. Here is the link where you can access all live
lectures for this course:

https://utexas.zoom.us/meeting/register/tUOpc-ihpjgonG9Bo7ep-q3accJI TIO TAOMPr (Meeting ID
994-41 9-83314)

All live lectures will be recorded and available on Canvas after the fact.why it’s important,
what you need to

know (recorded
lecture)

June 2020

10

stories
(recorded

Introduction to
class: Review
of syllabus,
assignments &
goal of class.
Professor and
student
introductions.
(LIVE)

11

Interviewing
101: Tips and
best practices
(recorded
lecture)

Intro to news
and journalism
lecture (LIVE)

Plus, a virtual
visit from
Writing Center
coach Lizzy
Smith

12

Diversity in
writing: How to
find diverse
story ideas,
sources, and
perspectives.‘4May2000 ~~ ~June 20200022————O—CSCut 2020 |
Sat

 
 
   
      
   
   
     
   
   

15 16 17

 
 

Story structure: Lead writing: /|Essential Being your own |Guest lecture
Basics of structuring |Workshop writing tips and |best editor: with Roy Peter
a news story where we'll tools (recorded |what to watch = |Clark (part 1):
(recorded lecture) deconstruct lecture) Writing is not
good leads and iti magic; it’s a set

AP STYLE Quiz __ [talk about why i of steps (LIVE)
No. 1 DUE BY they're well (recorded

11:59 P.M. done. (LIVE) lecture)

22 23 24 25 2/

Guest lecture with  |X-ray reading of|Share profile {Libel and Detailed review
Roy Peter Clark compelling piece pitches in ethics: what of feature

(part 2): Three profile stories _jclass, offer up |you need to story/personal
writing strategies (recorded feedback to know (recorded

that all writers need _|{lecture) one another. lecture)

(LIVE)

PLUS detailed (recorded
review of the profile lecture)
piece assignment,

including intros to

the people you'll be

interviewing for it.

AP STYLE QUIZ
No. 2 DUE BY
11:59 P.M.

29 30

The heart of
reporting/storytelling, |feature writing:
Part 1: Everything {Guest lecture
you need to know to |with Esmerelda
get started (recorded |Bermudez from
lecture) the Los

Angeles Times

AP STYLE Quiz {(“!VE)
No. 3 DUE BY

    

11:59 P.M.July 2020

1

Feature

reporting/storytelling, |X-ray reading _ |verification and

Part 2: Lessons from |workshop fact-checking

some of the best (LIVE) top of mind —

eature stories when writing

(recorded lecture) hard news
stories and

AP Style revie feature stories
yle review
PROFILE PIECE —|(virtual tip (recorded

DUE BY 11:59 P.M. |sheet)

9

mind moving

forward: Guest |with each other for
lecture with 30 minutes via Zoom
Elaine Garza o share feedback