Haydeé Marie Rodriguez

Email: taina@mail.utexas.edu

EDUCATION

Ph.D., University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas: 2000.
Curriculum & Instruction: Specializations: Bilingual Education, English as a Second
Language, Multilingual Studies, and Anthropology.

M.A., University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma: 1983.
Major: English

B.S., University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico: 1976.
Major: Biology, Minor: Chemistry

PROFESSIONAL APPOINTMENTS

Instructor, Central Texas College, Fort Sill, OK, 1981 — 1983.
Teacher of English Composition to first year college students in the ARMY.

Instructor, Reformed Theological Seminary, Jackson, MS, 1984.
Teacher of TESOL to missiology students.

ESL Specialist, Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, 1984 — 1986.
Teaacher of ESL to K-4 students; developed K-4 ESL curriculum.

Teaching Assistant, The University of Texas at Austin, 1986 — 1987.
Assistant to the C&I Dept. Chair, Dr. Mario Benitez, in EDC 371 Multicultural
Education.

University Supervisor, The University of Texas at Austin, 1987.
Supervisor of Elementary / Bilingual Student Teachers

Assistant Instructor, The University of Texas at Austin, 1988.
Teaching Multicultural Education, EDC 371, to education majors.

Chapter I. Director, Greyhills High School, Tuba City, AZ, 1989 — 1990.
Supervisor of faculty and educational staff in bilingual, Navajo — English, Chapter I
school wide program. Wrote grant application for funding. Implemented, and monitored
school wide program. Taught Journalism and English Literature: sponsor of the Native
American high school newspaper.Haydeé Marie Rodriguez

Teacher, Zion — Benton Township High School, Zion, IL, 1990 — 1992.
Teacher of English Literature to college preparatory students.

Chairperson, ESL Department, Englewood High School, Jacksonville, FL, 1992 — 1996.
Supervised faculty and staff in the ESL program. Provided instruction to 150 advanced
ESL students from multiple linguistic and cultural backgrounds. Designed and monitored
program. Member of the SIT (Student Improvement Team). Sponsor of the International
Club; Yearbook Advisor.

Member, Duval District Teacher Recruitment Committee, Jacksonville, FL, 1994 — 1996.
Participated in policy development for district’s teacher recruitment plan.

Professional Development Facilitator, Jacksonville, FL, 1994 — 1996.
Provided professional development and coordinated professional development for faculty
of 80 members.

Master ESOL Trainer, Duval District School Board, Jacksonville, FL, 1993 — 1996.
Provided teacher training to teachers and administrators for the 123,000 students’ district.
Training was provided also for school principals and members of the school board in the
state mandated ESL requirements for administrators. In addition, provided statewide
training as required by the Florida Department of Education in Tallahassee.

Educational Consultant, Heinle & Heinle, a division of International Thompson Publishing,
nationwide, 1994 — Present
Provide teacher training in ESL theory and methodology upon school districts’ request.
Have served numerous districts in Florida and Texas.

Assistant Instructor and University Supervisor at The University of Texas at Austin, 1996 —
1999,
Assistant Instructor for ALD 327, Sociocultural issues in learning. Supervise Elementary
and Bilingual Certification Student Teachers.

Program Coordinator, Title VII Collaboration Bilingual Education Teacher Preparation

Program at The University of Texas at Austin, 2000 — 2004.
Train elementary school teachers from the local district for mentoring novice teachers.
Supervise student teachers; instruct select methods courses — Language Arts Methods (in
Spanish), Reading Methods (in Spanish), and ESL Methods. Monitor implementation of
grant, coordinate faculty meetings, coordinate collaboration with the local school district,
monitor expenditures, and write annual and biennial reports for the federal Department of
Education. I have developed a professional library with teacher resources and children’s
literature in Spanish used by pre-service teachers in bilingual education certification
program, as well as students enrolled in Spanish courses in the College of Education.

Cohort Coordinator, Professional Development Sequence, EC-4 Bilingual Generalist at
The University of Texas at Austin, 2004 — Present.Haydeé Marie Rodriguez

Coordinate and develop the activities for the Professional Development Sequence (PDS)
of Interns and Student Teachers in the EC-6 Bilingual Generalist program. Coordinate
placement of 60 plus students, advise and support them through the three-semester PDS.
Supervise University Facilitators in charge of students in the field experiences, evaluate
student progress, and collaborate with district and school personnel. Serve on the Austin
ISD Teacher Support and Mentoring Committee. Serve on the Teacher Education field
experiences Advisory Council. Serve on ESL Minor Committee. Coordinate, design and
implement the field-sites collaborations with Zavala Elementary and Sanchez
Elementary.

Lecturer at The University of Texas at Austin, 2004 — 2007.
Taught three courses each semester to students in the Professional Development
Sequence of Interns and Apprentices in the EC-4 Bilingual Generalist program. In the
Fall I taught Reading Methods, Language Arts Methods, and ESL Methods. In the Spring
I taught Reading (a specialized reading course focusing on the needs of ELLs (English
Language Learners), Language Arts Methods, and Classroom Management & School
Organization. I also taught both an undergraduate and a graduate course in Applied
Linguistics.

Clinical Assistant Professor at the University of Texas at Austin, 2007 — Present.
Continue to coordinate the Bilingual Education Teacher Preparation program. This
program currently has three cohorts with a student population of 60 (Student Teachers
and Intern I and II students). I also teach four courses and coordinate the ESL
undergraduate course as well as supervise six Teaching Assistants involved with the
teacher preparation programs and support four Assistant Instructors in ESL.

Educational Consultant, ALAS Learning, 2005 — Present.
Provide professional development to teachers in the state of Texas and nationwide on
issues related to the education of Latino students. Specifically, provide advice and teacher
training to districts seeking to improve the quality of educational support they to Latino
English language learners through bilingual education or English as a Second Language
methodology.

Educational Consultant, Austin ISD, Austin, Texas, 2005 — Present.
Developed a late exit bilingual education program as part of a three-member team for the
elementary schools’ bilingual education program in the school district.
Provided teacher training in Second Language Acquisition to the faculties of the Sanchez
Elementary and Wooten Elementary. Will provide continued support as the late exit

program is implemented as a pilot at these campuses.

Provided training on academic rigor to the faculty at Odom Elementary.

Public Relations Chair, TexTESOL, Region III, Austin, Texas, 2008.Haydeé Marie Rodriguez

Faculty Sponsor, BESO (Bilingual Education Student Organization), UT Austin chapter,
Austin, Texas, 2004-Present.

Educational Consultant, Austin Children's Museum, Austin, Texas, 2010-Present.
Advise the planning team in developing culturally and linguistically relevant activities for
classrooms and family learning events. Develop and present professional development
for participating staff of partner elementary schools on language scaffolding methods for
English Language Learners.

SPECIAL PROJECTS

UTOPIA
Received a grant to develop ENLACE (English and Native Language Acquisition, and
Culture in Education): Bilingual Education and our Community. Through this web site, I
will share information with educators, parents, and members of our community outside
the “40 Acres” (UT) on issues related to Bilingual education such as effective practices,
resources, calendar of events, etc.

VIDA
Participated in this collaborative between The University of Texas at Austin and Austin
Independent School District. The collaborative known as the VIDA (Vigorous Instruction
Delivers Achievement) Program has a twofold purpose: 1) to enrich the relationship
between pre-service bilingual education teachers and mentor bilingual education teachers,
and 2) to promote bilingual student motivation through the effective use of the 5E’s
model for Science instruction, scaffolding (in the primary and secondary languages), and
the use of technology as a tool for student-centered instruction.

PORTAL
Received funding for a project I envisioned using videoconferencing technology to infuse
academic Spanish and rigorous teaching in Teacher Preparation. Project PORTAL,
Providing for Observation of Rigorous Teaching and Access to Language, facilitates
scheduling of classroom observations. Since all the Methods courses in our program are
field-based and have a significant component of instruction in Spanish it is challenging to
find faculty proficient in Spanish to teach the methods courses. The use of
videoconferencing technology opens a portal into the classrooms of bilingual education
teachers in the Austin ISD.

Mentorship Training
Developed and implemented training for Master bilingual education teachers who were
identified and recruited to serve as mentors for pre-service teachers under the
Collaborative Bilingual Education Teacher Preparation Program.Haydeé Marie Rodriguez

Children’s Literature and Teacher Resources Collection
Developed a collection of children’s literature in Spanish to facilitate the use of
children’s literature in planning of instruction by pre-service teachers. Also developed a
collection of teacher resources for use by bilingual education pre-service teachers during
their internship and apprenticeship.

Adult ESL Training
Developed an adult ESL program for the parents at Allison Elementary School in Austin
ISD in conjunction with a community service requirement for the bilingual education pre-
service teachers in my courses. Trained the pre-service teachers to conduct the classes,
providing a service to the community and an opportunity for the pre-service teachers to
have practice with delivering instruction and relating to parents.

Collaborative Intervention Project
Under the auspices of the Monarch Center at The University of Illinois, participated in the
CIP project to bring together student teachers in special education and bilingual education
to experience the collaborative process required to effectively meet the needs of English
language learners (ELLs) with special needs in bilingual education/ESL classrooms. Worked
closely with SED faculty to develop, implement, and evaluate the project.

SCHOLARLY PRODUCTIVITY AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICE
PRESENTATIONS

Developing an ESL Curriculum for Elementary Choctaw Indian Students:
A Cultural Approach presented at the 1986 NABE Convention, Chicago, IL.

District Concerns in Facilitating Video Training for Teachers, an ESL video training
presented for state administrators in November 1994, Fort Lauderdale, FL.

District Concerns in Facilitating Video Training for Teachers, an ESL video training
presented for state administrators in February 1995, Panama City, FL.

Literature in the ESL Classroom, presented at TESOL ‘95, Long Beach, CA.
Voices in Literature: An Interactive Approach, presented at Florida TESOL ’96, Tampa, FL.

Developing ESOL State Curriculum for Teacher Training, discussion session at NABE ’96,
Orlando, FL.

Cooperating Learning Strategies in the ESL Classroom, presented at the Puerto Rico
Department of Education Conference for English Teachers, May 1996, San Juan,
Puerto Rico.

Voices in Literature, presented at TEX TESOL ’96, November 1996, Houston, TX.

Multicultural Literature in the Bilingual Classroom, presented at NABE ’96, Fort Worth, TX.Haydeé Marie Rodriguez

Into, Through and Beyond...Developing Literacy in the ESL Classroom, presented at
TESOL, ’97, in Orlando, FL.

CALLA Strategies for Second Language Learners, 1999 through 2001, Irving ISD, Irving,
Texas. Presented a series of teacher training sessions to middle and high school teachers
in a number of metacognitive, cognitive, and social learning strategies (e.g., induction,
deduction, contextual clues, note taking, summarizing, imagery, cooperative groups, etc.)

ESL Strategies, Round Rock ISD, Round Rock, Texas, 2000 — 2001. Presented a series of
teacher training sessions to middle and high school teachers in a number of
metacognitive, cognitive, and social learning strategies (e.g. induction/deduction,
contextual clues, note taking, summarizing, imagery, cooperative groups, etc.)

Recommendations for an Undergraduate Teacher Preparation Program in Bilingual
Education, paper presented in October at TABE 2000 in EI Paso, TX.

Collaborative Bilingual Education Teacher Preparation Program: First Year Results,
paper presented in February at NABE 2001 in Phoenix, AZ.

Assessing Impact of ESOL Training for Duval School District in Jacksonville, FL. Interviewed
teachers and trainers to identify needs in June 2001.

Project Status: an update on the Collaborative Bilingual Education Teacher Preparation
Program, paper presented in October at TABE 2001 in Dallas, TX.

Living on Cotton Farm: Mexican American Life in Texas presentation at TABE 2001 in
Dallas, TX. Presented Spanish translations of lesson plans developed for social studies
based on archeological research project by the center for Archeological Research at
UTSA.

Teacher Training for Bilingual Education: A report on programmatic changes in an
institution of higher education, paper presented in March at NABE 2002 in
Philadelphia, PA.

ESL Strategies, a six-hour professional development training session for Region XIII for the
Alternative Certification cadre in the bilingual education certification sequence.

Bilingual Education Pre-Service Teachers: What More Do They Need? Paper presented in
October at TABE 2002 in Houston, TX.

Reflective Teaching in Writing Instruction: The “Organic Connection,” paper presented on
February 1, 2003 at NABE in New Orleans, LA.

It’s Not Over at Graduation! Collaborative Bilingual Education Teacher Preparation
Program, presented in January 2004 at NABE in Albuquerque, NM.Haydeé Marie Rodriguez

ESL Strategies for All Level Teachers, presented to pre-service teachers at The University of
Texas at Austin, Fall 2004 and Spring 2005.

Issues in Planning for English Language Learners, presented to Lanier High School vertical
team (all middle schools and elementary schools faculty included), Austin ISD,
November 2004.

Recruiting, Training, Retaining Quality Bilingual Education Teachers: Collaboration and
Mentoring Go a Long Way! Presented at NABE 2005, San Antonio, TX.

Bilingual Teacher Preparation: Lessons and Reflections in Social Studies Instruction,
presented at NABE 2005 in San Antonio, TX.

Second Language Acquisition Theory: Implications for Teachers. Keynote address at
Bilingual Academy, Austin ISD, July 19, 2005.

Bilingual Education / ESL Effective Practices. Training session, conducted for Brazoport ISD
bilingual teachers Pre-K-12, Lake Jackson, TX, July 2005.

Teaching Social Studies in Bilingual Classrooms, presented at NABE 2006 in Phoenix, AZ.

Making Connections: Technology Bridging Bilingual Education Pre-service Teachers and
Their mentors for Student Success, presented at NABE 2006 in Phoenix, AZ.

Supporting the Learning and Development of English Language Learners: Scaffolding
Strategies, presented to Austin ISD bilingual education teachers, April 1, 2006.

Teacher Preparation, Recruitment, and Retention in Bilingual Education / ESL, July 31,
2006. Presentation to the Arkansas Association of Education Administrators, Little Rock,
Arkansas.

English Language Learners in your Classroom: Selected ESL Strategies, Spring and Fall
2007. Developed for all EC-4 majors at UT Austin.

PORTAL: Providing Opportunities for Relevant Teaching and Access to Language,
February 2007. National Association for Bilingual Education (NABE), San José,
California.

Remembering Who You Are: Latina Pre-service Teachers Exploration of Identity Through
Reading and Writing, February 2008. National Association for Bilingual Education (NABE),
Tampa, Florida.

Identities and Literacies: Pre-service Bilingual Latina Teachers Journeys with Reading and
Writing, February 2008. National Association for Bilingual Education (NABE), Tampa, Florida.Haydeé Marie Rodriguez

ESL Seminar Series, The University of Texas at Austin, Spring/Fall 2008-09 long term
SeSSiONs.

Making Connections: Bilingual Education Pre-service Teachers Rediscover their
Bilingual/Bicultural Past Through Children’s Literature, February 2009. National
Association for Bilingual Education (NABE), Austin, Texas.

Collaborative Intervention Projects among Pre-service Bilingual Education and
Special Education Teachers, February 2011. National Association for Bilingual Education
(NABE), New Orleans, LA.

STUDENT SUPPORT

Participated in the Qualifying Exams Committee for Dora Fabelo, doctoral candidate in the
Multilingual Studies / Bilingual Education Program.

Participated in the Qualifying Exams Committee for Monica Neshyba, doctoral candidate in the
Multilingual Studies / Bilingual Education Program.

Participated in the Dissertation Committee for Dora Fabelo, doctoral candidate in the
Multilingual Studies / Bilingual Education Program.

Advised undergraduate bilingual education majors in the area of professional development in the
teacher preparation program and all aspects related to the PDS in bilingual education including
scholarships opportunities, language proficiency, and course content.
Supervised and advised students teaching ALD 325, Second Language Acquisition and EDC
371, Applied Linguistics as Assistant Instructors.

RECOGNITIONS
National Hispanic Scholarship Fund recipient in 1987 and 1988.

Nominee for the Graduate Opportunities Scholarship, Department of Curriculum &
Instruction, The University of Texas at Austin, 1988.

Selected by the State of Florida’s Department of Education to appear as the model teacher
for training video for ESOL state mandated curriculum for training teachers in ESL
methodology.

Teacher of the Year, 1994-1995, Englewood High School, Jacksonville, FL.

Finalist for the Teacher of the Year Competition, Duval School District (five finalists in
12,000 teacher population) 1994-1995.Haydeé Marie Rodriguez

Nominee for 1995-1996 Who’s Who in Education.

Title VII Bilingual Education Graduate Fellowship Program fellow in 1998 and 1999.

PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIPS
NABE (National Association for Bilingual Education)
TESOL (Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages)
NCTE (National Council for Teachers of English)

Kappa Delta Phi International Honor Society