Page 1 of 6

eOnline Version - J362F ¢ Journalism
Portfolio *° Summer 2020
Unique #: 08065

Meeting time: M-F 12:30 — 1:45
p.m.
Meeting place: Zoom

Professor

Dr. Kate West “Dr. Kate”

Email: katewest@utexas.edu

Twitter: @kateweidaw

Cell phone: 512-751-9685

Office hours: By appointment via Zoom

Course descriptions and objectives

This portfolio class simulates a newsroom experience as you polish newsgathering skills and
journalistic values across all media: print, broadcast and online. You will bounce ideas and
seek feedback from classmates and your instructor, to produce a print, video and online
Story.

Objectives

e At the end of the course, you will be able to gather information for use in online and other
digital formats.

e Will be able to generate newsworthy story project ideas
Understand the best practices for producing digital journalism stories

e Be able to use appropriate reporting and production tools

e Will have created a professional online portfolio, which demonstrates your
ability integrate multimedia storytelling elements into each assignment

Required Texts and other materials
e Read the Austin American-Statesman and the Daily Texan every day, and keep up with
the news generally
e AP Stylebook, online

Recommended
Broadcast News & Writing Stylebook

Classes

The class should be viewed as a newsroom at a professional news organization. I am your
editor. Your colleagues are your fellow student journalists. You will share your knowledge and
opinions about the local, regional, national and international stories worth reporting and writing.

Attendance
Consistent and prompt attendance and participation are critical in your preparation to become a
professional. Therefore, class attendance is required.J362F Syllabus/page 2 of 7

Labs and Equipment
If you want to shoot video you will need to utilize your cell phones for video and still
photographs unless you have additional personal equipment you are interested in using.

For editing, Adobe is offering a 1 year Creative Cloud Student Subscription for $17.75 total.
Typically an Adobe education subscription is about $20 a month.

Other Resources
1. Lynda.com — This is an amazing website of video tutorials on a vast array of techniques for
video and audio, as well as Excel and lots more. It’s free to us on the UT campus. See:

https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/comm/Lynda

2. http://transom.org/ This is a free site that provides detailed explanations of myriad of topics
regarding recording audio. Of particular interest is the section on various techniques.

 

Deadlines
In the real world, there are few valid excuses for late assignments and missed deadlines. J362F
is a training course and we expect you to be organized and meet deadlines. Part of what you’ ll
learn in here is time management.

Story pitches

One of the traits of a great reporter is finding good story ideas, rather than relying on
assignments from editors. In this class, I’Il help you develop this key aspect of reporting. The
important thing is for you to begin thinking 24/7 about good story ideas. Some of the best ideas
will come to you when you’re not looking for them!

On pitch days, you’ll come prepared with two story pitches. I will select which story idea is
most newsworthy and workable. The entire class is expected to weigh in and contribute
questions, perspectives, suggestions, leads. This will help everyone sharpen their focus and
come up with terrific stories.

Submit them to Dr. Kate via e-mail (katewest@ utexas.edu) before class. You'll pitch your story
idea and we’ ll discuss.

In the field

If you run into roadblocks that are beyond you -- or you are unsure how to handle a situation --
call your professor/editor. If you find out that your story is taking an unexpected turn, CALL
ME AND LET ME KNOW and ask for guidance. Don’t assume you can do a story that I have
not approved. You may get a 0 for that assignment.

Video Story

Each video story must include these elements:
1. A text story/script
2. A complete video story

Print Story

Each print story must include these elements:
1. Three sources
2. 3 to 5 photos to accompany the story.
3. 600 to 800 wordsJ362F Syllabus/page 3 of 7
Online Story
Each online story must include these elements:
1. You being creative.
2. Video or photos.
3. Must have a writing component

You will have 5-10 minutes to present your work in class (via Zoom). So, make sure you have
posted before class.

General grading
Plus-minus grading will be used for this course.

A = 94-100
A- = 90-93
B+ = 87-89
B = 84-86
B- = 80-83
C+ = 77-79
C = 74-76
C- = 70-73
D+ = 67-69
D = 64-66
D- = 60-63
F = 0-60

A grading sheet for the news package, print story, online story, and portfolio will be posted on
Canvas.

Story pitches: 10%

Video Story: 25%

Print Story: 25%

Online Story: 25%

Web portfolio: 10%

Class participation: 5%

Deadlines

Pitches DUE: Monday, June 15th. Email pitches to Dr. Kate and post to discussion board.
First draft of print story DUE: Monday, June 22

First draft of video & script story DUE: Monday, June 29

First draft of online story DUE: Monday, July 6

Final draft of print, video and online DUE: Monday, July 13. Provide a link to each project
connected to your website. Turn in under assignments on Canvas.

Classroom Policy:

Personal Pronoun Preference: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are
especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the
instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to
address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me ofJ362F Syllabus/page 4 of 7
this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate
changes to my records.

Q Drop Policy: If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ ll
need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline, which typically
occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas
institution. For more information:

http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop

 

Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your
pending absence at least 14 days before the date of observance of a
religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give
you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.

 

Unless I hear from you, I will expect you to attend the Zoom conferences on the
designated days listed above.

TARDINESS: Instructors have the right to penalize students who are tardy without an official
excuse, and do NOT have to help tardy students make up missed or incomplete assignments.

LATE ASSIGNMENTS: Deadlines are important in journalism. Usually assignments turned in
after the Canvas window or by a stated deadline are not accepted. Consult with your instructor

about late and/or missing assignments because of an excused absence. The lab instructor has the
right to impose a grade penalty or refuse to accept a late assignment for other mitigating factors.

COMPUTERS, TABLETS AND SMARTPHONES (AND DIGITAL RESOURCES):

e Use devices and computers (including smartphones) appropriately, whether in lab, lecture
or on assignment.

e Don’t use social media for companionship or evil during lecture and lab.

e It’s fine and even preferred to take some notes by hand. Using computers, (laptops or
desktops) rather than smartphones, are preferred for completing assignments and reference
in lecture and lab. Contact me if you have special computer needs.

e Your smartphone must be face down or put away during lecture and lab unless instructors
allow otherwise for an assignment, reference or attendance.

e If instructors determine a student is using a device for non-class purposes (besides
cheating, which is dealt with severely and separately), that student’s laptop privileges in
lecture and lab may be rescinded for the rest of the class time or semester. Repeated or
egregious abuse of this policy could result in an overall negative grade for lab, or a grade
deduction or zero for any assignment.

e Canvas: This web-based course management system with password-protected access at
http://canvas.utexas.edu/ —is used to distribute course materials, to communicate and
collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and for online quizzes and
surveys. To get help with Canvas, try its online resources and 1-855-308-2494.J362F Syllabus/page 5 of 7

  

GENERAL GUIDELINES AND RESOURCES

Your success in this class is important to us. We will all need accommodations because we all
learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you,
please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs
and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources in Moody College and on
campus:

The Moody Writing Support Program is more than a writing aid — the program helps students
understand what makes a good story and how to pursue it. The program’s robust journalism
coaching is an asset for journalism students and designed to help them excel in — and not just pass

— their courses. https://sites.utexas.edu/moodywriting/

 

Services for Students with Disabilities: This class respects and welcomes students of all
backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning
environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with
me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let
me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I
can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone).

htto://divers; tu/disabilitv/about/

Other resources:

Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/

Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/

ITS: Need help with technology? Call the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 or go to
http://www.utexas.edu/its/

Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/

Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress,
test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there
are options available for support.
For immediate support:

e Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor

| 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu

e CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW

e BMC third floor, | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)

 

FREE Services at CMHC:
e Brief assessments and referral services:
Mental health and wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
e MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
e Classes, workshops and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.htmlJ362F Syllabus/page 6 of 7
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of
fellow students, TAs or instructors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-
5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right — it probably isn’t. Trust your
instincts and share your concerns. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office
of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Again, call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.

Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/

 

Title [IX Reporting: Title [X is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence
and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a
learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:

1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.

2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced

harm or have become involved in a Title [X investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.

Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title LX Coordinator. Iam a Responsible Employee and must report any Title [X related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with
any faculty or staff member about a Title [X related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate @ austin.utexas.edu For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX
Office at titleix @ austin.utexas.edu.

I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report
such misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic
information, sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression can be reported to the
Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.
e Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints
of sexual misconduct and discrimination.

oFile a report of discrimination via online form

oCall to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity @utexas.edu

 

e Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for
enforcing federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities
that receive federal financial assistance from the Department of Education, including
sex discrimination covered under Title IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-661-
9600.

 

e Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcingJ362F Syllabus/page 7 of 7
federal laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on
the basis of a protected class, including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the
Equal rtunity in Employment Commission -669-4000.

Evacuation Information: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation
from the Office of Campus Safety and Security: 512-471-5767 or

http://www.utexas.edu/safety/

Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting
and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.

e Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building.

e Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class.

e In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.

Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be

found at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/

 

ISSUES THAT CAN GET YOU IN TROUBLE IN JOURNALISM AND AT UT

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

Avoid conflicts of interest — in which you have a vested interest in the people, groups, events or

organizations that you might cover — and what could be perceived as conflicts of interest. Do not
itch stories that potentially contain a conflict of interest.

 

Potential conflicts of interest include (but are not limited to):
e School of Journalism and Moody College of Communications instructors, professors,
administrators, staffers, and undergraduate and graduate students;
friends, family members and their friends, roommates, suitemates,
boyfriends and girlfriends; former boyfriends and girlfriends,
sorority/fraternity sisters/brothers
bosses and former bosses, co-workers and former co-workers;
people you know socially, regularly attend church with
people you are suing or have sued you ...

When in doubt about a potential conflict, ask as soon as possible. If I discover after a story pitch

has been approved that there is a conflict of interest, I will not accept the story and your deadline
will NOT extended. If you turn in assignment in which there is a conflict of interest, whether or
not you do so mindfully, you will lose major points on the assignment, the actual amount to be
determined solely by the instructor.

UNIVERSITY HONOR CODE AND ACADEMIC DISHONESTY
(including PLAGIARISM)

Academic Integrity: Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University ofJ362F Syllabus/page 8 of 7
Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by
the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are responsible for
understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code, which can be

found here: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php

 

Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating,
plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed
to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but
is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an
extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this
syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty
damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-
career. Students who violate UT rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from UT. For details

see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.

 

In regard to journalistic production, academic dishonesty includes:

e Plagiarizing or using someone else’s material, another media source, student work or
yourself (in part or in whole) and representing it as new for this class. Plagiarism is taken
very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that
you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you are guilty of
plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failing this course.

e Pitching or turning in an assignment from a previous class without instructor permission.

e Making up quotes, sources and facts.

e Not interviewing people who appear in your stories.

e Not giving appropriate attribution or citation of a source or background information. In
this class, you will learn how to properly attribute information.

e Cheating during a quiz or any assignment, graded or not