Lara Latimer, PhD

603 B Bellmont Hall

The University of Texas at Austin
2109 San Jacinto D3700

Austin, TX 78712

512-232-4351
lara.a.latimer@utexas.edu

EDUCATION
Postdoctoral Research in Food Psychology/Behavioral Economics August 2013-
October 2014
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
Dyson School of Applied Economics & Management, Food & Brand Lab
Advisor: Brian Wansink, PhD
Doctor of Philosophy in Health Education, Concentration in Health Promotion August 2013

The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX

College of Education, Department of Kinesiology and Health Education

Advisor: Keryn Pasch, PhD, MPH

Dissertation Title: Direct Observations of In-School Food and Beverage Promotion: Advances in
Measures and Prevalence Differences at the School-Level

Master of Arts in Health Education August 2009
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
College of Education, Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
Advisor: Keryn Pasch, PhD, MPH
Master’s Thesis: Self-efficacy for weight loss among multi-ethnic, low-income women:
A psychometric evaluation

Bachelor of Science in Exercise and Sport Science August 2003
Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX
College of Arts and Sciences, Department of Health, Exercise, and Sport Science
Minor in Nutrition, College of Human Sciences, Department of Nutrition, Hospitality, and Retailing

PUBLICATIONS

Karn, S., Fernandez, A., Latimer, L.A., Seymour, M., Loukas, A., Sharp, B. (2017). Texas College
Campus Tobacco Policies: Examining the Comprehensiveness of College Tobacco Policies. Health
Behavior and Policy Review.

 

Wansink, B., Latimer, L.A., Pope, L., & (2016). “Don’t Eat So Much:” How Parent Comments Relate to
Female Weight Satisfaction. Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity.
22(3):475-481.

Latimer, L.A., Pope, L., & Wansink, B. (2015). Food Neophiles: Profiling the Adventurous Eater. Obesity.
23(8):1577-1581.

Latimer, L.A., Pasch, K.E., & Bartholomew, J.B. (2015). Elementary school lunch categorization and the
correlations with dietitian recommendations. Perspectives in Public Health.136(1):43-49.

Pope, L., Latimer, L.A., & Wansink, B. (2015). Viewers vs. Doers: How watching food television and
cooking frequency relate to BMI. Appetite. 90, 131-135.

Latimer, L.A., Batanova, M., Loukas, A. (2014). Prevalence and Harm Perceptions of Various Tobacco
Products Among College Students. Nicotine and Tobacco Research. First published online: November 9,
2013. 16(5):519-526.

Latimer, L.A., Velazquez, C.E., & Pasch, K.E. (2013). Characteristics and behaviors of non-overweight
college students who are trying to lose weight. Journal of Primary Prevention. 34(4):251-260.Korinek, E.V., Bartholomew, J.B., Jowers, E.M., & Latimer, L.A. (2013). Fruit and Vegetable Exposure in
Children is Linked to the Selection of a Wider Variety of Healthy Foods at School. Maternal & Child
Nutrition. 11(4), 999-1010.

Pasch, K.E., Latimer, L.A., Cance, J.D., Moe, S.G., & Lytle, L.A. (2012). Longitudinal relationships
between sleep and risk behaviors. Journal of Youth and Adolescence. 41(9), 1184-1196.

Walker, L.O., Sterling, B.S., Latimer, L., Kim, S., Garcia, A.A., & Fowles, E.R. (2012). Ethnic-Specific
Weight-Loss Interventions for Low-Income Postpartum Women: Findings and Lessons. Western Journal
of Nursing Research. 34(5): 654-676.

Velazquez, C.E., Poulos, N.S., Latimer, L.A., & Pasch, K.E. (2011). Energy drink consumption and
alcohol use behaviors among college age youth. Drug and Alcohol Dependence.123(1—3):167—1 72.

Latimer, L., Walker, L.O., Kim, S., Sterling, B., & Pasch, K.E. (2011). Self-efficacy Scale for Weight Loss
among Multi-ethnic, Low-income Women: A Psychometric Evaluation. Journal of Nutrition Education and
Behavior. 43(4):279-83.

Sterling, B.S., Fowles, E.R., Kim, S., & Latimer, L., Walker, L.O. (2011). Ethnic-Specific Perceptions of
Altered Control among American Women: Implications for Health Promotion Programs after Pregnancy.
Health Care for Women International. 32:39-56.

Walker, L. O., Kim, S., Sterling, B. S., & Latimer, L. (2010). Developing Health Promotion Interventions:
A Multisource Method Applied to Weight Loss Among Low-Income Postpartum Women. Public Health
Nursing. (27), 172-179.

Sterling, B.S., Fowles, E.R., Garcia, A.A., Jenkins, S.K., Wilkinson, S., Kim, M., Kim, S., Latimer, L., &
Walker, L.O. (2009). Altered Perceptions of Personal Control About Retained Weight and Depressive
Symptoms in Low-Income Postpartum Women. Journal of Community Health Nursing. 26:143-157.

PUBLICATIONS SUBMITTED
Grossberg, L.A., Loukas, A., Fernandez, A., Latimer, L.A., & Karn, S. (under review). Examining student
perceptions of tobacco policy enforcement strategies on college campuses in Texas.

 

Golaszewski, N.M, Errisuriz, V.L., Latimer, L.A., & Pasch, K.E. (under review). Do associations between
young adults’ perceived weight-based discrimination and health-related outcomes differ by perceived
body image and/or weight status?

Korinek, E.V., Pasch, K.E., Jowers, E.M., Latimer, L.A., & Bartholomew, J.B. (under review). The effect
of school lunch menu composition on low-fat food selection and participation rates in elementary children.

PUBLICATIONS IN PROGRESS
Herrera, A., Fernandez, A., Pasch, K., Latimer, L., Karn, S., Loukas, A. Lessons Learned for Social
Media Use in College Tobacco Prevention Program.

 

BOOK CHAPTERS

Latimer, L.A., Delk, J., Springer, A. E., Pasch, K. E. (2013). The Role of Schools in Food and Beverage
Marketing — Significance, Challenges, Next Steps. In J. D. Williams, K. E. Pasch, & C. Collins (Eds.),
Advances in Communication Research to Reduce Childhood Obesity. New York, New York: Springer

 

PRESENTATIONS AND POSTERS
Latimer, L.A. (panelist). (08/2019). Spoke about Peers Against Tobacco on the Tobacco-Free Colleges
Panel. National Conference on Tobacco or Health.

 

Karn, S, (poster presenter). Latimer, L.A., Robertson, T., Skinner, D., Loukas, A. (08/2019). Tobacco
Policy Database: A Resource for Texas Colleges’ Policy Language, Comprehensiveness, and
Comparison. Poster presentation at the National Conference on Tobacco or Health.

Latimer, L.A. (panelist). (04/2019). Spoke about Peers Against Tobacco on the Electronic Nicotine
Delivery Systems Panel. The University of Texas System Eliminate Tobacco Use Summit.Latimer, L.A. (panelist). (04/2018). Sooke about Peers Against Tobacco on the Prevention Panel. The
University of Texas System Eliminate Tobacco Use Summit.

Grossberg, L.A. (poster presenter), Loukas, A., Fernandez, A., & Latimer, L.A. (02/2018). Using the
theory of planned behavior to assess peer enforcement of tobacco policies on college campuses in
Texas. Poster presentation at the 24th annual meeting of the Society for Research on Nicotine &
Tobacco.

Latimer, L.A. (presenter). (04/2017). Presentation about Peers Against Tobacco. The University of Texas
System Eliminate Tobacco Use Summit.

Latimer, L.A. (poster presenter), Skinner, D. Karn, S., & Loukas, A. (03/2017). Peers Against Tobacco: A
Coordinated, Peer-Led Tobacco Prevention Program Aimed At Texas College Students. Poster
presentation at the National Conference on Tobacco or Health.

Herrera, A. (poster presenter), Pasch, K.E., Latimer, L., Karn, S., Loukas, A. (03/2017). Lessons Learned
from Environmental Tobacco Scan Tools for Tobacco Prevention among College Students in Texas.
Poster presentation at the National Conference on Tobacco or Health.

Gonzalez, X.B. (poster presenter) & Latimer, L.A. (04/2016). Can We Empower Children to Change
Their Dietary Behavior? Poster presentation at The University of Texas at Austin, Bridging Disciplines
Program poster session.

Latimer, L.A., Karn, S. (poster presenter), Loukas, A., Graf, A. (04/2016). Peers Against Tobacco: A
Multi-Component Tobacco Prevention Program Targeting Texas College Students. Presentation. Poster
presentation at the National Summit on Smokeless and Spit Tobacco.

Latimer, L.A., Skinner, D. Karn, S., Loukas, A., Graf, A. (04/2016). Peers Against Tobacco: A Multi-
Component Tobacco Prevention Program Targeting Texas College Students. Presentation at the Reduce
Tobacco Use Conference.

Wansink, B. (poster presenter), Just, D., Dollahite, J., Latimer, L.A., Thomas, L., Brumberg, A., Hill, T.
(03/2014). Smarter Lunchrooms: Does Changing Environments Really Give More Nutritional Bang for the
Buck? Poster presentation at the annual Society of Nutrition Education & Behavior conference.

Latimer, L.A., Pope, L., & Wansink, B. (poster presenter) (03/2014). Adventurous eating: expand your
palate, not your waistline. Poster presentation at the annual Society of Nutrition Education & Behavior
conference.

Pope, L., Latimer, L.A., Wansink, B. (01/2014). Healthier from Home? Lunch Source and Daily Calorie
Cycling In Children. Poster presentation at the annual Society of Nutrition Education & Behavior
conference.

Latimer, L.A. & Pasch, K.E. (12/2013). Direct observations of in-school food/beverage promotions:
Types, prevalence, and differences by school-level characteristics. Poster presentation at the annual
meeting of the International Society for Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity.

Latimer, L.A. & Pasch, K.E. (12/2013). Measuring in-school food/beverage promotions: Reliability of a
new electronic tool. Poster presentation at the annual meeting of the International Society for Behavioral
Nutrition and Physical Activity.

Latimer, L.A., Pope, L., Wansink, B. (11/2013). “Don’t Eat So Much:”
How Parental Comments about a Girl’s Weight Influence Them as Adults. Poster presentation at the
annual Experimental Biology conference.

Pope, L., Latimer, L.A., Wansink, B. (11/2013). Viewers vs. Doers: How watching food television and
cooking frequency relate to BMI. Poster presentation at the annual Experimental Biology conference.Latimer, L. et a/ (2011). Self-efficacy Scale for Weight Loss among Multi-ethnic, Low-income Women: A
Psychometric Evaluation. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior. 43(4):279-83. This publication was
chosen for workshop entitled “Getting your Results into JNEB: Insights into Survey Development & What
Makes a Report” at the annual Society of Nutrition Education & Behavior conference in 2013.

Batanova, M. (poster presenter), Latimer, L.A., Loukas, A. (08/2013). Cigarette-Only versus Poly
Tobacco Use among College Students: Are there Differences in Prevalence and Perceptions? Poster
presentation at the annual meeting of the National Smokeless Tobacco Summit.

Golaszewski, N.M. (poster presenter), Errisuriz, V.L., Latimer, L.A., Pasch, K.E. (05/2013). Do
associations between young adults’ perceived weight-based discrimination and health-related outcomes
differ by perceived body image and/or weight status? Poster presentation at the annual meeting of the
Society for Preventive Research.

Do, K.T. (poster presenter), Latimer, L.A., Pasch, K.E. (04/2013). Developing a Protocol to Measure
Food and Beverage Promotion in Schools. Poster presentation at The University of Texas at Austin,
Bridging Disciplines Program poster session.

Latimer, L.A., Poulos, N.S., Pasch, K.E. (04/2013) Associations between perceptions of others’ dietary
behaviors and college students’ dietary behaviors. Poster presentation at the annual Texas Academy of
Nutrition and Dietetics Food and Nutrition Conference.

Poulos N.S. (poster presenter), Latimer L.A., Pasch K.E. (04/2013). Associations between media use
and dietary behaviors among college youth. Poster presentation at the annual Texas Academy of
Nutrition and Dietetics Food and Nutrition Conference.

Latimer, L.A., Jowers, E.M., Bartholomew, J.B. (05/2012). Socioeconomic differences in student ratings
of elementary school lunch menu items. Poster presentation at the annual meeting of the International
Society for Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity.

Latimer, L.A., Pasch, K.E., Delk, J.E., Springer, A.E. (05/2012). Developing an electronic measure of
food, beverage, and activity marketing/promotion in schools. Poster presentation at the annual meeting of
the International Society for Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity.

Latimer, L.A., Pasch KE, Springer AE, Kelder SH. (05/2012). Middle school students’ sleep duration and
patterns: Associations with physical activity and television time. Poster presentation at the annual meeting
of the International Society for Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity.

Latimer, L.A., Velazquez, C.E. (poster presenter), Pasch, K.E. (03/2011). Energy Drink Consumption
and Alcohol Use Among College Students. Poster presented at the annual meeting of the American
Academy of Health Behavior.

Latimer, L.A., Walker, L.O., Kim, S., Sterling, B., Pasch, K.E. (03/2011). Self-efficacy Scale for Weight
Loss among Multi-ethnic, Low-income Women: A Psychometric Evaluation. Poster presented at the
annual meeting of the Center for Health Promotion & Disease Prevention Research in Underserved
Populations.

RESEARCH EXPERIENCE
Tobacco Research & Evaluation Team - Peers Against Tobacco College Tobacco Initiative
This is a system-level, multi-component tobacco prevention program for colleges and universities in the
state of Texas. The goal of the program is to reduce the use of tobacco and alternative tobacco products
(e.g., electronic cigarettes, hookah) among students, and ultimately, to change the overall tobacco
landscape among Texas colleges and universities.
Funded by: Texas Department of State Health Services
Principal Investigator: Alexandra Loukas, PhD
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Senior Research Program Coordinator September 2015-present
¢ Coordinate all aspects of project development, implementation, & evaluation
¢ Recruit colleges to take part in the Peers Against Tobacco programe Maintain communication with participating schools throughout project
e Develop & edit team documents
e Collaborate on conference abstracts and journal publications

Health Education Coordinator | September 2014-September 2015

e Recruited colleges to take part in the Peers Against Tobacco program

e Maintained communication with participating schools throughout project
e Edited team documents

e Provided website feedback

Graduate Research Assistant July 2011-August 2011
June 2012-August 2012
June 2013-August 2013
e Researched and developed a new survey to assess the knowledge and use of, and beliefs about
smokeless- and potential reduced exposure products.
e Ran statistical analyses from college survey data and began the manuscript for these data.
e Examined Quitline data to determine variables that may be useful in future reports.

Cornell Food and Brand Lab
The Food and Brand Lab is an interdisciplinary group from disciplines such as behavioral economics,
psychology, food science, marketing, agricultural, human nutrition, and education. Projects focus on
better understanding consumers and how they relate to foods and packaged foods.
Funded by: grants and consumer groups
Director: Brian Wansink, PhD
Charles H. Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
Postdoctoral Research Associate August 2013 — October 2014
e Served as Project Manager for USDA-funded grant to examine behavioral economics intervention
in middle school cafeterias.
e Conducted secondary analyses with data on health behaviors and outcomes, primarily focused
on nutrition behaviors and weight.

Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) NE-CS Nutrition Education and Evaluation Contract
The project aims to provide technical assistance to the state WIC program and WIC local agencies in the
areas of program/training development, strategic planning, and evaluation.
Funded by: Texas Department of State Health Services, WIC Program
Principal Investigator: Robin D. Atwood, EdD
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Graduate Research Assistant June 2011-August 2011
¢ Reviewed staff training modules to verify inclusion of competencies.
e Conducted preliminary data analyses.
e Developed themes for qualitative data.

Prevention Research Lab
This lab conducts research with the ultimate goal of preventing and reducing negative health outcomes
among youth from early childhood through emerging adulthood. Projects focus on the influence of media
on youth risk behaviors, as well as the factors that may alter the influence of advertising, and how risk
behaviors, including substance use, obesity-related behaviors, sleep, and energy drink consumption, may
co-occur among youth.
Director: Keryn Pasch, MPH, PhD
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Graduate Research Assistant August 2009-August 2013
e Conducted data analyses.
¢ Coordinated with colleagues on manuscript development, writing, and submission.
e Attended weekly meetings in which we reviewed and critiqued manuscripts, developed ideas for
future research projects, and engaged in career development.
e Organized materials for and managed undergrad research assistants.e Developed Coordinated Approach To Child Health (CATCH) parent lesson on Screen Time and
Its Consequences. July 2010.

I-CAN! Initiatives for Children’s Activity and Nutrition.
This research project targets children's behavior with school-based interventions that are designed to
increase physical activity and promote healthy eating. The specific project | worked on focused on
elementary school lunch entrees, selections, and participation rates across SES.
Funding: R21 grant from the National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Principal Investigator: John Bartholomew, PhD
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Graduate Research Assistant August 2009-June 2011
¢ Collected data on elementary students’ school lunch purchases.
e Organized and implemented child taste tests and child and adult focus groups.
e Collected data for a sub-study that examines correlations of registered dietitians’ professional
recommendations for generally healthy and unhealthy foods correlate of the same.

Reducing Postpartum Weight Retention among Low Income, Ethnically Diverse Women
The goal of this study is to construct ethnic-specific weight loss programs for low income African
American, Hispanic, and non-Hispanic White women based on diverse evidence sources including
positive deviance analysis and to conduct preliminary tests of program efficacy.
Funding: R21 grant from the National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Nursing Research
Principal Investigator: Lorraine Walker, PhD, RN, FAAN
School of Nursing, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Graduate Research Assistant February 2008-August 2009
e Assisted senior research staff in development and implementation of a weight-loss intervention to
reduce low-income mothers’ postpartum weight retention.
e Collected data on physical and psychosocial measures.
e Collaborated on publications.

Center for Tobacco Prevention and Control
Funded by: Texas Department of Sate Health Services
Principal Investigator: Donna Bacchi, MD, MPH
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX
Graduate Research Assistant January 2004-August 2005
e Assisted with literature searches for grant writing and paper submissions.
e Contributed to quarterly newsletter.
e Developed and maintained health education websites.
e Assisted in survey development.
e Provided health education to students at health promotion events.

TEACHING EXPERIENCE
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Spring 2015, Summer 2015, Fall 2015, Spring 2016, Fall 2016, Spring 2017, Fall 2017, Spring 2018,
Summer 2018, Fall 2018, Spring 2019, Fall 2019, Spring 2020
HED 329K: Child & Adolescent Health
Assistant Professor of Instruction

e Develop and deliver course content

e Correspond with and advise students

e Grade assignments

 

Department of Kinesiology and Health Education, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Spring 2019
HED 373: Evaluation & Research Methods
Assistant Professor of Instruction
e Develop and deliver course content
e Correspond with and advise students
e Grade assignmentsDoctoral Dissertation Committee Mentor, Health Education and Promotion, Walden University,
Remote/Online

December 2018-present

HLTH 9101: Dissertation (Committee Chair - Spring, Summer, Fall 2019, Winter 2019 Quarters)
HLTH 9101: Dissertation (Committee Member - Spring, Summer, Fall 2019, Winter 2019 Quarters)
HLTH 9101: Dissertation (Committee Member - Fall 2019, Winter 2019 Quarters)

Masters of Public Health Program, Walden University, Remote/Online
December 2016-present
PUBH 6475: Program Planning, Implementation, & Evaluation (Winter 2019 Quarter)
PUBH 6030: Socio-Ecological Perspectives on Health (Summer, Fall, & Winter 2017 Quarters; Spring,
Summer, & Fall 2018 Quarters)
PUBH 6245: Applied Research in Public Health (Spring 2017 Quarter)
Contributing Faculty Member
¢ Facilitate online discussions
e Grade assignments
e Correspond with students

Department of Nutritional Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Spring & Fall 2008, Spring & Fall 2009, Spring & Fall 2011, Spring & Fall 2012, Spring 2013
NTR 338W: Issues in Nutrition and Health
Teaching Assistant
e Guest lecturer
e Developed some course materials
e Advised students, grade assignments
e Assisted guest speakers

Department of Kinesiology and Health Education, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Fall 2011, Spring 2012
HED 329K: Child, Adolescent, Adult Health
Teaching Assistant
e Prepared and presented original lecture material
e Developed course materials
¢ Advised students
e Graded assignments
e Guest lecturer (Fall 2012)

Department of Nutritional Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Fall 2009, Summer 2011
NTR 332: Community Nutrition
Teaching Assistant
e Advised students
e Graded assignments

Department of Kinesiology and Health Education, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Fall 2010
HED 370K: Foundations of Health Promotion |
Teaching Assistant
e Organized course materials in preparation for semester
e Prepared and presented original lecture material
e Advised students & graded assignments
e Guest lecturer (Fall 2011, Fall 2012)

Department of Nutritional Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Spring 2010
NTR 330: Nutrition Education and Counseling
Teaching Assistant
¢ Developed lecture and some materialse Prepared and presented original lecture material
e Advised students
e Graded assignments

Department of Kinesiology and Health Education, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Fall 2009
HED 395: Intervention Mapping: Health Promotion Development (core requirement for all HED graduate
students)
Teaching Assistant

e Assisted in development of course materials

e Advised graduate students

e Graded assignments

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE

Lara Latimer, Personal Wellness Advocate & Consultant August 2014-present

www.laralatimer.com

Owner

e | work with individuals one-on-one and provide seminars and workshops to help people make

health behavior changes. We get to the root of why they may have been unsuccessful in the past
with issues such as weight loss, incorporating regular exercise, enhancing diet, improving sleep,
and increasing energy and mental clarity.

 

Fitness Institute of Texas (FIT) March 2017 — April 2017
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
FIT Mind & Body
e Six-week process-focused program with an emphasis on the mental, emotional, and spiritual
aspects of health.

Covenant Medical Group, Lubbock, TX November 2005-July 2007
Medical Assistant, Pediatrics, Drs. Farmer, Hanson, and Gray

e Took patient vital signs and evaluated patients for well checks

¢ Completed child health assessment with parents

¢ Assisted with appointments and inquiries

e Instrumental in transition to electronic medical records

Commercial Fitness Centers (Golds Gym and BodyWorks), Lubbock, TX May 1997-July 2007
e Personal Trainer
e Front Desk Associate/Manager

City of Lubbock Health Department, Lubbock, TX February 2003-May 2003
e Responsible for organization and promotion of National Public Health Week
e Assisted with staff health fairs
e Developed and distributed weekly health tips to media

Texas Tech University Health Services, Lubbock, TX January 2001-May 2001
e Assisted with student health education projects

SCHOLARSHIPS & AWARDS

e The University of Texas at Austin, Department of Kinesiology & Health Education, 2019
Undergraduate Teaching Excellence Award.

e The University of Texas Continuing Fellowship. $12,000 for academic year 2012-2013.

e Ed Annual Endowed Presidential Fellowship. $2500 for academic year 2011-2012. Nominated by
UT Health Education faculty, chosen by The Subvention Fund Committee, UT Department of
Kinesiology and Health Education.

e Kappa Delta Pi International Honor Society 2011.

¢ Cooke Scholarship. $1000 for academic year 2010-2011. Nominated by UT Health Education
faculty, chosen by The Subvention Fund Committee, UT Department of Kinesiology and Health
Education.e George and Frieda Soutter Endowed Scholarship. Full tuition and books paid for academic year
2002-2003. Received from TTU Department of Health, Exercise, and Sport Science.

¢ Superior Scholastic Scholarship. $500 for each semester during academic years 1999-2003.
Recipient based on grade point average.

e Texas Early High School Graduation Scholarship. $1000 in 1999. Received for graduating one
year early from high school.

e Golden Key International Honor Society inductee 2002.

e Texas Tech University President's List 1999-2003.

CERTIFICATIONS

Professional Life Coach Certification, The Life Coaching Institute of America (ICF approved training
program), October 2019 — present.

Plant-Based Nutrition Certification, T. Colin Campbell Center for Nutrition Studies through eCornell,
Cornell University, November 2015-present.

Health Fitness Specialist, National Certification, American College of Sports Medicine, May 2002-present.

 

SERVICE & VOLUNTEER
Volunteer — Travis County Correctional Complex. Serve as a group meditation leader for female medium
and maximum inmates. September 2018 — present.

 

Second Reader on Masters thesis. The University of Texas at Austin, Department of Kinesiology and
Health Education. Spring 2019.

Invited Speaker for The University of Texas at Austin, Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
McCraw Lecture Series. February 2018.

Panelist for Faculty Affairs Committee in The University of Texas Senate of College Councils Women in
Academia Panel. November 2017.

Faculty Advisor, National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) On Campus. Fall 2016-present.

Faculty Mentor for The University of Texas at Austin Bridging Disciplines Program. Fall 2015, Spring
2016, Fall 2017. Fall 2018, Spring 2019, Summer 2019, Fall 2019.

Guest Speaker — Camp Texas, UT Women of Excellence, UT Kinesiology Club, Fitness Institute of Texas
(FIT) Get FIT Lunch & Learn; National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) on Campus; St. Edward’s
University Health & Counseling staff meeting; The University of Texas First-year Interest Group (FIG)
Program; The University of Texas, Texas Women of Excellence campus group; TX 4000 Tech Ranch
Austin; and the Scott, Douglass, & McConnico Women’s Conference. Courses include Sport Psychology
(undergraduate & graduate), Theories of Substance Use & Abuse (undergraduate), Child & Adolescent
Health (undergraduate), & Personal Physical Activity (undergraduate).

Volunteer — Divine Canines, a therapy dog organization. November 2014-present.

Volunteer — WeViva, an organization that provides affordable & accessible fitness & nutrition classes to
people in low-income communities throughout Austin, TX. June 2016-December 2016.

Co-Leader Healthy Food Choices in Schools, Additional School Food Initiatives group for the Cornell
University Cooperative Extension Community of Practice. October 2013-September 2014.

Volunteer — Ithaca Health Alliance. March 2014-August 2014.
Volunteer - Tompkins County Learning Partners Adult Literacy. March 2014- August 2014.
Volunteer - Alzheimer’s Association, Central New York State. March 2014- August 2014.

Health Education Student Association (HESA). Department of Kinesiology & Health Education, The
University of Texas at Austin. Active member August 2007-August 2013. Vice President 2010-2011.Chosen as a member of Be Our Voice: Mobilizing Healthcare Professionals in the Fight Against Obesity
(a childhood obesity advocacy program through National Initiative for Children’s Healthcare Quality). This
was a yearlong commitment to engage in a grassroots initiative to combat childhood obesity at the local
level. March 2010-March 2011.

Panelist for Student Dietetics Association career information session, Department of Nutritional Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX. Fall 2009, Spring 2017.

Participant in Childhood Obesity Prevention Initiative, Covenant Health Systems, Lubbock, TX, Fall 2006.

CONTINUING EDUCATION

Postdoctoral Leadership Program member, Postdoctoral Studies Program at Cornell University. This
program provides a practical forum to assess and develop personal leadership skills in self-knowledge,
planning and problem solving, group dynamics and team building, cultural fluency, conflict resolution, and
facilitation of change. September 2013-March 2014.

 

Successful completion of the Division of Statistics & Scientific Computation statistical training short
course: Data Analysis Using SAS. May 2011.

PEER REVIEW

Public Health Nursing - Invited Reviewer

BioMed Central Pediatrics - Invited Reviewer

Journal of Physical Activity & Health - Invited Reviewer

American Journal of Preventive Medicine - Approved to co-review with an invited reviewer