EDP S384C Addiction Counseling, Unique 74361
EDP 8352N Addiction Counseling, Unique 74005

Instructor Mike C. Parent, PhD TX LP 37009

Classroom Online via zoom.
Zoom room addresses will be posted on the announcement board each
class day.

Class days July 14-August 13.

Classes will be held live on Zoom from 1:00pm to 3:30pm, and posted in
their entirety on canvas.
Student hours Student hours must be requested via email and will be held over zoom.

Course Description

The purpose of this course is to provide intermediate knowledge in substance use and addictive
disorders, and the treatment thereof. Specific attention will be given to (a) knowledge transfer of
information related to specific substances and addictions, (b) physiological processes of
addiction, (c) effective treatment of addiction, (d) contemporary issues in the area of substance
use and addiction, and (e) issues related to intersectional diversity as it pertains to addictive
disorders.

Course components

Tests. There are weekly tests on material covered for the week. Tests may refer back to prior
material. Tests will vary in length; they will be weighted to account for equal points regardless of
length. Tests will include multiple choice and definition items.

Undergraduates: In my classes, I usually allow re-tests to allow students to make up lost points.
The online nature of this class, oddly, makes this harder. So, the retests will take the following
form.

After completing a test, you will receive test results. Within exactly one week of receiving test
results, you may undertake the re-test. The re-test will be worth HALF of the points you DID
NOT GET on the original test. So, for example, if you got 80% on the test, your re-test can get
you up to 10% (half of 100 minus 80).

To complete the re-test, you will download a Word document that alternative questions for all
items. You will delete all items EXCEPT items you did not get points for in multiple choice, and
any items in definitions that you attempted but did not get complete marks for. You will
complete these items only, and submit the word document.

Graduate students: There are no re-tests for graduate students.

Discussion board posts. Each week, there will be a set of topics that students may choose from
to make one discussion board post. Discussion board posts are reviews of research articles. Note
that you may NOT use anything other than a scholarly article for the basis of the post, unless
specifically stated in the discussion prompt (for example, a prompt might ask you to find a website that gives wrong information about substances). There is a slide show on using google
scholar and the UT libraries web site to find such articles, if you are not familiar with doing so.

Undergraduate students: Requirements for the posting will be listed for each discussion post.
Generally you will use an article to answer a specific question.

Graduate students: Requirements for the posting will be listed for each discussion post. You will
use an article to answer a specific question.

Presentation. Undergraduates only are required to complete | presentation. You will work in
pairs for this assignment. You can pair up by Thurs of the first class week with someone you
would like to pair with, and after that I will randomly assign the pairs.

I’m aware that people are wary of group work. Grading 1s structured so that although people
work in pairs, grading is done independently. Thus, one person cannot do nothing and rely on the
other partner, and no one has to feel as though they must do double the work for a partner who is
not pulling their weight. There IS, however, a bonus (50 pts) for the best presentation.

Presentations take two forms. The first is a debate on an issue; the group takes both sides (e.g.,
one person represents one side and the other represents another side). These must be recorded,
and any format can be used (e.g., you can, but do not have to, just do a powerpoint and narrative
it; you don’t really need slides, etc.). The second format is more simply a presentation on a topic.
In neither case are these presentations supposed to be exhaustive; see the grading rubric.

This is NOT meant to serve as an exhaustive review of a topic. Instead, pick 4 “take-home”
points (e.g., in a debate, two on each side; in a single topic, four key points) and focus on those.

Paper. Graduate students only will complete a 10-page (double spaced, 1-inch margins, TNR 12
font, not including references) paper on a topic related to substance use treatment.

Formatting for assignments

This course is presented in an abbreviated format. APA style may be new to some undergraduate
students, and asking you to learn that style on top of the content of the class is not conducive to
focusing on the content of the course. Thus, there is not an APA style requirements for the
discussion board posts. The requirements for formatting are:

1. You can copy/paste the reference entry from google scholar or UT libraries. Again, format
will not count for points so if there are errors (journal name is not capitalized, paper title is
capitalized, ending page number is missing, papers are not in alphabetical order, etc.), the student
will not be penalized.

2. The reference entry, though, should be all you copy/paste. Plagiarism detection will still be
run, and intentional misrepresentation of writing as your own will be an academic integrity
violation. Simply put, put things in your own words. This is not a stats class and stats is not a
prerequisite, so you will not have to describe statistical methods used in the papers. Most
discussion board posts should be completable in a paragraph or two, so there is no reason to
copy/paste anything from the paper itself.3. Graduate students should still reference research in their papers. However, you will not have
point dedications for minor APA style deviations (e.g., use whatever header levels you want, no
penalties if an ampersand is used outside of parentheses, no reason to have a running head, etc.).

Grading Breakdown:

Undergrads

Tests 5 tests 100 points each 500
Discussion posts 5 posts 50 points each 250
Presentation 1 presentation 100 points 100

Graduate students

Tests 5 tests 100 points each 500
Discussion posts 5 posts 50 points each 250
Paper 1 paper 250 points 250
Textbook

There is no required text for this class.

Undergraduate students are expected to review all lecture material. Graduate students are
expected to review lecture material and read all primary source material listed in Readings.
Graduate student tests will include material from the readings, undergraduate tests will include
material covered in lecture only (not the readings).Course Alignment to CACREP Standards
1. FOUNDATIONS
5.A.1l.a. History and development of addiction counseling
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.1.b. Theories and models of addiction related to substance use as well as behavioral and
process addictions
Covered in Week 1.
5.A.1.c. Principles and philosophies of addiction-related self-help.
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.1.d. Principles, models, and documentation formats of biopsychosocial case
conceptualization and treatment planning.
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.l.e. Neurological, behavioral, psychological, physical, and social effects of psychoactive
substances and addictive disorders on the user and significant others
Covered by substance in individual lectures.
5.A.1.f. Psychological tests and assessments specific to addiction counseling.
Covered in Week 4.
2. CONTEXTUAL DIMENSIONS
5.A.2.a. Roles and settings of addiction counselors
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.2.b. Potential for addictive and substance use disorders to mimic and/or co-occur with a
variety of medical and psychological disorders
Covered in Week 4 and in individual substance lectures.
5.A.2.c. Factors that increase the likelihood for a person, community, or group to be at risk for or
resilient to psychoactive substance use disorders.
Covered in Week 5.
5.A.2.d. Regulatory processes and substance abuse policy relative to service delivery
opportunities in addiction counseling.
Covered in Week 1.
5.A.2.e. Importance of vocation, family, social networks, and community systems in the
addiction treatment and recovery process
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.2.f. Role of wellness and spirituality in the addiction recovery process
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.2.g. Culturally and developmentally relevant education programs that raise awareness and
support addiction and substance abuse prevention and the recovery process
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.2.h. Classifications, indications, and contraindications of commonly prescribed
psychopharmacological medications for appropriate medical referral and consultation.
Covered in Week 3.
5.A.2.1. Diagnostic process, including differential diagnosis and the use of current diagnostic
classification systems, including the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM) and the International Classification of Diseases (ICD)
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.2.j. Cultural factors relevant to addiction and addictive behavior.
Covered in Week | and individual substance lectures.5.A.2.k. Professional organizations, preparation standards, and credentials relevant to the
practice of addiction counseling.

Covered in Week 4.
5.A.2.1. Legal and ethical considerations specific to addiction counseling.

Covered in Week 4.
5.A.2.m. Record keeping, third party reimbursement, and other practice and management
considerations in addiction counseling

Covered in Week 4.

3. PRACTICE
5.A.3.a. Screening, assessment, and testing for addiction, including diagnostic interviews, mental
status examination, symptom inventories, and psychoeducational and personality assessments
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.3.b. Assessment of biopsychosocial and spiritual history relevant to addiction
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.3.c. Assessment for symptoms of psychoactive substance toxicity, intoxication, and
withdrawal.
Covered in Week 4 and individual substance lectures.
5.A.3.d. Techniques and interventions related to substance abuse and other addictions
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.3.e. Strategies for reducing the persisting negative effects of substance use, abuse,
dependence, and addictive disorders.
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.3.f. Strategies for helping clients identify the effects of addiction on life problems and the
effects of continued harmful use or abuse, and the benefits of a life without addiction.
Covered in Week 1.
5.A.3.g. Evaluating and identifying individualized strategies and treatment modalities relative to
clients’ stage of dependence, change, or recovery.
Covered in Week 4.
5.A.3.h. Strategies for interfacing with the legal system and working with court referred clients
Covered in Week 4.
CLINICAL MENTAL HEALTH COUNSELING
Students who are preparing to specialize as clinical mental health counselors will demonstrate
the knowledge and skills necessary to address a wide variety of circumstances within the context
of clinical mental health counseling. Counselor education programs with a specialty area in
clinical mental health counseling must document where each of the lettered standards listed
below is covered in the curriculum.
1. FOUNDATIONS
5.C.1.d: Neurobiological medical foundation and etiology of addiction and co-occurring
disorders.
Covered in Week 1.
2. Contextual Dimension
5.C.2.e: Potential for substance use disorders to mimic and/or co-occur with a variety of
neurological, medical, and psychological disorders
Covered in Week 1.Potential topics for class presentations (undergrads) or papers (graduate students)

Debates:

1. AA is prettymuch necessary for alcohol addiction and has the best results vs AA is not
effective for most people and other things (e.g., SMART) work as well or better.

2. Complete abstinence is a necessary goal for nearly all alcohol/drug treatment seekers vs
Moderation in alcohol use is a completely acceptable goal for most alcohol/drug treatment
seekers.

3. Legalization of medical marijuana is important to public health vs most medical marijuana
seekers are drug seeking.

4. Lowering the drinking age will reduce drinking problems vs lowering the drinking age will
increase drinking problems.

Single-shots:

1. Minority stress is associated with substance use, yet African American adolescents reliably
report lower alcohol use rates than White adolescents — Why?

2. What are the intersections between alcohol use and sexual consent, especially those relevant to
a college population, and what are effective means of teaching about consent?

3. Intersections of race and legal penalties for substance possession.

4. Is methadone treatment effective? Why is it not used more?

5. Does mandatory drug testing prevent relapse?

6. Review of the gateway hypothesis.

7. Review the impact of alcohol consumption on driving ability.

Additional topics are possible only with approval from me (Dr. Parent). I do strongly encourage
you to think of topics that are personally interesting to you. Especially for undergrads, you can
do a presentation on something that you find personally interesting. E.g., if you are into gaming,
there is a huge literature on professional gaming and use of stimulants; if you are interested in
athletics, there is lots on performance enhancing drugs; if you are going into a field like Law,
there is a long literature on how to deal with an impaired professional. I’m more than happy to
talk about your interests with you and help you find a topic.

Topics pertaining only to history (e.g., history of the Opium wars) are not allowed, though.Class schedule

Week 1
July 14

Readings:

July 15

Readings:

July 16

Readings:

Week 2
July 21

Syllabus review.
Survey of neurobiology of addiction.
Review of models of addiction.

Heather, N. (2017). Q: Is addiction a brain disease or a moral failing? A:
Neither. Neuroethics, 10(1), 115-124.

Koskela, M., Back, S., Voikar, V., Richie, C. T., Domanskyi, A., Harvey, B. K.,
& Airavaara, M. (2017). Update of neurotrophic factors in neurobiology of
addiction and future directions. Neurobiology of Disease, 97, 189-200.

Alcohol, Tobacco

Grant, B. F., Goldstein, R. B., Saha, T. D., Chou, S. P., Jung, J., Zhang, H., ... &
Hasin, D. S. (2015). Epidemiology of DSM-5 alcohol use disorder: results from
the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions III. JAMA
psychiatry, 72(8), 757-766.

Hiscock, R., Bauld, L., Amos, A., Fidler, J. A., & Munafo, M. (2012).
Socioeconomic status and smoking: a review. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 1248(1), 107-123.

Caffeine, Marijuana

Meredith, S. E., Juliano, L. M., Hughes, J. R., & Griffiths, R. R. (2013). Caffeine
use disorder: a comprehensive review and research agenda. Journal of caffeine
research, 3(3), 114-130.

Addicott, M. A. (2014). Caffeine use disorder: a review of the evidence and future
implications. Current addiction reports, 1(3), 186-192.

Hasin, D. S., Sarvet, A. L., Cerda, M., Keyes, K. M., Stohl, M., Galea, S., & Wall,
M. M. (2017). US adult illicit cannabis use, cannabis use disorder, and medical
marijuana laws: 1991-1992 to 2012-2013. JAMA psychiatry, 74(6), 579-588.

Cerda, M., Mauro, C., Hamilton, A., Levy, N. S., Santaella-Tenorio, J., Hasin, D.,
... & Martins, S. S. (2020). Association between recreational marijuana
legalization in the United States and changes in marijuana use and cannabis use
disorder from 2008 to 2016. JAMA psychiatry, 77(2), 165-171.

Heroin, CocaineReadings:

July 22

Readings:

July 23

Readings:

Week 3
July 28

Readings:

Compton, W. M., Jones, C. M., & Baldwin, G. T. (2016). Relationship between
nonmedical prescription-opioid use and heroin use. New England Journal of
Medicine, 374(2), 154-163.

Spronk, D. B., van Wel, J. H., Ramaekers, J. G., & Verkes, R. J. (2013).
Characterizing the cognitive effects of cocaine: a comprehensive review.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 37(8), 1838-1859.

Ketamine, GHB, Ecstacy

Li, J. H., Vicknasingam, B., Cheung, Y. W., Zhou, W., Nurhidayat, A. W., Des
Jarlais, D. C., & Schottenfeld, R. (2011). To use or not to use: an update on licit
and illicit ketamine use. Substance abuse and rehabilitation, 2, 11.

George, J., Kinner, S. A., Bruno, R., Degenhardt, L., & Dunn, M. (2010).
Contextualising psychological distress among regular ecstasy users: The
importance of sociodemographic factors and patterns of drug use. Drug and
alcohol review, 29(3), 243-249.

Inhalants, methamphetamine

Howard, M. O., Bowen, S. E., Garland, E. L., Perron, B. E., & Vaughn, M. G.
(2011). Inhalant use and inhalant use disorders in the United States. Addiction
science & clinical practice, 6(1), 18.

Marshall, B. D., & Werb, D. (2010). Health outcomes associated with
methamphetamine use among young people: a systematic review. Addiction,
105(6), 991-1002.

Cheng, W. S., Garfein, R. S., Semple, S. J., Strathdee, S. A., Zians, J. K., &
Patterson, T. L. (2010). Binge use and sex and drug use behaviors among HIV (-),
heterosexual methamphetamine users in San Diego. Substance use & misuse,
45(1-2), 116-133.

Hallucinogens, Body modifying drugs

Spring, M. G., Ostrow, R. D., & Hallock, R. M. (2016). A profile of those who
use hallucinogenic mushrooms. In Neuropathology of drug addictions and
substance misuse (pp. 794-800). Academic Press.

Kanayama, G., Hudson, J. I., & Pope Jr, H. G. (2010). Illicit anabolic—androgenic
steroid use. Hormones and behavior, 58(1), 111-121.July 29

Readings:

July 30

Readings:

Week 4
Aug 4

Readings:

Aug 5

Readings

Vanberg, P., & Atar, D. (2010). Androgenic anabolic steroid abuse and the
cardiovascular system. In Doping in Sports: Biochemical Principles, Effects and
Analysis (pp. 411-457). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Hall, M., Grogan, S., & Gough, B. (2015). ‘It is safe to use if you are healthy’: A
discursive analysis of men’s online accounts of ephedrine use. Psychology &
health, 30(7), 770-782.

Designer drugs, Prescription abuse

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC. (2012). CDC grand rounds:
prescription drug overdoses-a US epidemic. MMWR. Morbidity and mortality
weekly report, 61(1), 10.

Other substances

Review this page:

https://www.drugabuse.gov/drugs-abuse/emerging-trends-alerts

 

 

Behavioral (Process) addictions. Gambling, video games.

Murch, W. S., & Clark, L. (2016). Games in the brain: neural substrates of
gambling addiction. The Neuroscientist, 22(5), 534-545.

Van Roo, A. J., Schoenmakers, T. M., Vermulst, A. A., Van Den Eijnden, R. J.,
& Van De Mheen, D. (2011). Online video game addiction: identification of
addicted adolescent gamers. addiction, 106(1), 205-212.

D Griffiths, M., J Kuss, D., & L King, D. (2012). Video game addiction: Past,
present and future. Current Psychiatry Reviews, 8(4), 308-318.

Reay, B., Attwood, N., & Gooder, C. (2013). Inventing sex: The short history of
sex addiction. Sexuality & Culture, 17(1), 1-19.

Treatment

Geppert, C. M., & Bogenschutz, M. P. (2009). Ethics in substance use disorder
treatment. Psychiatric Clinics, 32(2), 283-297.

Kleinig, J. (2008). The ethics of harm reduction. Substance use & misuse, 43(1),
1-16.

Duff, C. (2004). Drug use as a ‘practice of the self’: Is there any place for an
‘ethics of moderation’ in contemporary drug policy?. International Journal of
Drug Policy, 15(5-6), 385-393.Aug 6

Readings:

Week 5
Aug 11

Readings:

Aug 12

Readings:

Van Boekel, L. C., Brouwers, E. P., Van Weeghel, J., & Garretsen, H. F. (2013).
Stigma among health professionals towards patients with substance use disorders
and its consequences for healthcare delivery: systematic review. Drug and alcohol
dependence, 131(1-2), 23-35.

Treatment

Fiorentine, R. (1999). After drug treatment: Are 12-step programs effective in
maintaining abstinence?. The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse,
25(1), 93-116.

Kelly, J. F., Stout, R. L., & Slaymaker, V. (2013). Emerging adults’ treatment
outcomes in relation to 12-step mutual-help attendance and active involvement.
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 129(1-2), 151-157.

Glasner-Edwards, S., & Rawson, R. (2010). Evidence-based practices in addiction
treatment: Review and recommendations for public policy. Health policy, 97(2-3),
93-104.

Treatment

Polcin, D. L., Korcha, R. A., Bond, J., & Galloway, G. (2010). Sober living
houses for alcohol and drug dependence: 18-month outcomes. Journal of
Substance Abuse Treatment, 38(4), 356-365.

Hendershot, C. S., Witkiewitz, K., George, W. H., & Marlatt, G. A. (2011).
Relapse prevention for addictive behaviors. Substance abuse treatment,
prevention, and policy, 6(1), 17.

Patti, T., & De Vries, T. J. (2013). The role of impulsivity in relapse
vulnerability. Current opinion in neurobiology, 23(4), 700-705.

Prevention

Singh, R. D., Jimerson, S. R., Renshaw, T., Saeki, E., Hart, S. R., Earhart, J., &
Stewart, K. (2011). A summary and synthesis of contemporary empirical evidence
regarding the effects of the Drug Abuse Resistance Education Program (DARE).
Contemporary School Psychology: Formerly" The California School
Psychologist", 15(1), 93-102.

Griffin, K. W., & Botvin, G. J. (2010). Evidence-based interventions for
preventing substance use disorders in adolescents. Child and Adolescent
Psychiatric Clinics, 19(3), 505-526.Aug 13 Review; no new material.