NTR W374P — ADVANCED PRACTICUM IN DIETETICS
Unique #: 85120
Summer, 2020

Course Description:
Advanced Practicum in Dietetics

Culminating experience in the practice of dietetics in the specialty areas of nutrition.
Students will reflect on personal & professional development and prepare materials
(ePortfolio) that will assist in seeking an entry-level position in dietetics.

Instructors:

Ladia Hernandez PhD, RD
Office: GEA 313B

Phone: 512.471.0890

Cell phone: 713.205.2387

Email: ladia.hernandez@austin.utexas.edu

Office Hours: to be held upon request
Objectives: Upon completion of these courses, students should demonstrate:

Professional standards of behavior

Personal and professional growth

Effective written and verbal communication

Appropriate positive attitude and service orientation

Cooperation as an effective team player

Familiarity with community nutrition opportunities

Performance in accordance with the Code of Ethics for the Profession of
Dietetics.

8. Participation in professional activities.

9. Use of current technologies for information and communication activities.
10. Self-assessment used to evaluate interest in and aptitude for dietetic practice
in specialty area of interest.

NOAA PWN >Class Schedule:

Online Classroom: Classes will meet via Zoom (aka online classroom) during Weeks
1, 3-7 on Tuesday and Thursday, Yam - 11am CST. During Weeks 1,3-7, students will
complete weekly modules and assignments outside of the online classroom. Week 2
(6/15-6/18), students will attend SPHN 2020 Annual Meeting (Virtual).

Virtual Rotation Dates: Students will complete a virtual rotation during Week 8 and
Week 9 (7/27 - 8/7) with a preceptor. Each virtual rotation is different. On average,
students are expected to work 40-hour work weeks (similar to your preceptor’s
schedule). Your daily start and finish times will vary and are at the discretion of your
preceptor.

Week 10 (meet daily from 9-11am CST) - Students will meet with Dr. Meadows to
complete paperwork and end of rotation presentations

Monday (8/10) - Completion of CPD paperwork with Dr. Meadows
Tuesday (8/11) - End of rotation presentations

Wednesday (8/12) - End of rotation presentations

Thursday (8/13) - Focus groups with Dr. Meadows

Friday (8/14) - Last class day celebration

Evaluation: Will be based on successful completion of assigned rotations as well as
course assignments and activities.

Performance Evaluations and Reflections: (20%)

Preceptor Evaluations - A formal evaluation of competency using the Summer
Rotation Evaluation Form will be scheduled for the last day of each rotation.

Self Evaluations - In preparation for your preceptor evaluation, complete the same form
and conduct a self evaluation using the Summer Rotation Evaluation Form.

performance this summer. This will be completed at the end of the summer course.

Webinar Reflections - The class will collectively determine the 20 webinars that will be
discussed during the summer session. During each class day, we will participate in a
peer-lead conversation of two webinars. Each week, students will submit a brief

 

— Faculty Evaluation - The Professional Rubric will be used to evaluate your overallsummary of your learnings and how you plan to apply the information gained from the
four webinars.

your virtual rotation including expectations.

Assignments and Activities: (80%

— First Impression Reflection - Students will submit comments related to your first day of

UTNI Nutrition Education Assignment: In this assignment, students will study,
define, and create new ways to apply nutrition knowledge and interventions to
healthcare delivery and patient practices in everyday life.

SNAP Challenge Assignment: Food diary, cost analysis and paper reflecting on
experience.

RDN Advocacy/Business Plan: Development and presentation of Business Plan to
support RDN Advocacy for target population.

of strengths and needs for continued learning. You are required to attend a minimum
of six professional meeting hours during your CPD experience (three semesters) and
have four hours of meaningful volunteer experiences throughout your CPD experience.
Include documentation and reflection of these experiences in your ePortfolio. You are
NOT required to comment on all the CRDs. The CRDs give you guidance into better
understanding that you are prepared to be a registered dietitian.

Special Topics Webinar Presentations: Moderate a 15-minute presentation on
assigned webinar topics. Students will deliver 1 webinar presentation during the
course.

End of the Semester Virtual Rotation Oral Reports: 10-minute presentation on your
virtual rotation. Students completing rotations with the same preceptor may present

their experience as a group.

 

ePortfolio: Include examples of projects you have completed throughout your
educational experience preparing you to be a registered dietitian. Include recognitionCoordinated Program Policies Students must be familiar with and follow both
program and practice facility policies. During the practicum students should pay
particular attention to the CPD policies regarding:

Requirements for Completion of Program
Eligibility/Availability for Supervised Practice (
Attendance

Academic and Professional Honesty
Confidentiality of Information
Non-discrimination

Dress Requirements

Attendance

Realizing that students may occasionally have an unavoidable absence, students are
allowed up to 4 hours of personal leave during the summer sessions. Personal leave
will be assessed in 1-hour blocks.

Online Classroom Days: If the personal leave occurs during an on-line classroom
workshop day, all activities/assignments must be made-up as needed.

Virtual Rotation Days: Make-up time may be required for absence during assigned
time during week 8 and 9 virtual rotations. Regardless of make-up, a penalty of a letter
grade may be assessed to the course grade for each additional 4 hours of absence.

Last Class Week: No personal leave time can be used during the last days of class.

Absence due to illness will not result in a grade penalty provided the student seeks
medical care promptly. The need for make-up will be at the discretion of the course
instructor depending on the duration of absence and impact on achievement of required
competencies.

lf you have questions about how the absence policy applies to you, please see the
course instructor or program director.

Religious Holidays: Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination
schedules. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious
holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.

Documented Disability Statement: Students who require special accommodations
need to get a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259—voice or 471-4641—
TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to theinstructor at the beginning of the semester (no later than 4" day of class) and
accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.

Use of Canvas: This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system
in which a password-protected site is created for each course. You will be responsible
for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class reading assignments and
announcements. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday
through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.

lf you do not want your name included in UT password-protected electronic class
rosters, you must restrict your directory information in the Office of the Registrar, MAI
Building, Rm 1. If you have restricted this information, you will not receive email, class
materials and confidential grade postings on Canvas.

Academic Honesty

Please review the UT academic integrity policy

at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ (Links to an external site.)Links to an external
site.. (Link to University Honor Code: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-
university/#universitycodeofconduct) (Links to an external site.)Links to an external
site. . A tutorial on plagiarism can be found

at http://legacy.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/ (Links to
an external site.)Links to an external site. Information on unauthorized collaboration can
be found at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to an external
site.)Links to an external site.

 

Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is
acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
your concerns about another individual's behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and the University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512.232.505 or

visit http://www.utexas.edu.safety/bcal (Links to an external site.)Links to an external

site.