Ph.D.

M.A.

M.S. Ed

B.A.

Laura D. Turner
Bilingual Bicultural Education
The Department of Curriculum and Instruction
The University of Texas at Austin College of Education
(513) 907-1774 (C) laura.turner@utexas.edu

 

Expected 2021, The Department of Curriculum and Instruction
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
Bilingual Bicultural Education

2012, Spanish and Latin American Linguistic, Literary and Cultural Studies
New York University in Madrid, Madrid, Espana

Applied Linguistics: Spain and Latin America

Honors and Awards: University Tuition Scholarship, GSAS

2010, Bilingual Special Education

The City College at the City University of New York, New York City, NY
Students with Disabilities Certification (5-9)

Summer 2009, Centro de Lenguas Modernas, Universidad de Granada, Espafia

2004, Political Science, Spanish minor

Miami University, Oxford, OH

Honors and Awards: Phi Alpha Delta, Political Science Honorary
Pi Sigma Alpha, Law Fraternity

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE

2019— present

2016— 2018

2014— 2016

2012— 2014

2012— 2014

2012-2013

2010— 2011

2009— 2010

2006— 2010

Assistant Instructor, The University of Texas at Austin

Director, American Space Madrid
American Space Madrid, a collaboration between U.S. Embassy Madrid and the International
Institute in Spain

School Designer and Remote Educational Consultant
EL Education, formerly known as Expeditionary Learning

Peer Review and Outreach
Texas Education Review, Bilingual Bicultural Education Division

Graduate Research Assistant

The University of Texas at Austin — Project ESTRE2LLA, MDCC grant funded by the U.S.
Department of Education Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP), Department of
Multicultural Special Education, Austin, TX

University Facilitator and Teaching Assistant

The University of Texas at Austin — The Department of Special Education and The Department of
Curriculum and Instruction Course: Methods of Teaching Writing in the Spanish Bilingual
Classroom

Lead English Mentor Teacher
Instituto de Educacion Secundaria (I.E.S.) Centro Bilingue, Alyanub, Vera, Espana
Council on International Education Exchange, Region of Almeria, Espana

10'" Grade Instructional Guide / School Leadership Team Teacher Representative / Certified
Facilitator: Critical Friends Groups (CFG), National School Reform Faculty
Validus Preparatory Academy: An Expeditionary Learning School, Bronx, NY

Bilingual Special Education Coordinator / Resource Specialist/ Bilingual Special Education Teacher
Validus Preparatory Academy: An Expeditionary Learning School, Bronx, NYCONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS

The Loris Malaguzzi International Center (2018). Study Group Participant with New York State Educators and
Stakeholders. Reggio Emilia, Italy.

Turner, L. and Cavazos, L. (2013). Holistic Bilingualism vs. Parallel Bilingualism: Student Utilization of Linguistic
Resources in Writing. Panel Discussion for the Congreso Internacional de Ensefianza Bilingiie en Centros Educativos
(CIEB), Madrid, Espafia.

Turner, L. and Alberico, C. (2009). Raising Global Awareness Through Differentiation. Expeditionary Learning Schools
Outward Bound National Conference, Master Class Presenter. Baltimore, MD.

SUBMITTED CONFERENCE PROPOSALS

Turner, L. Raciolinguistics and Disproportionality: A Dual Framework to Discuss Issues of Over and
Underrepresentation in Special Education. Presentation proposal for the annual meeting of NABE, San Diego, CA
(2020). Accepted.

Franquiz, M., Turner, L. and Lopez, M. Humanizing Teaching Practices: Designing Language and Literacy Instruction
for ELLs. Symposium proposal for the annual meeting of NABE, San Diego, CA (2014). Accepted.

Turner, L., Cavazos, L., and Ortiz, A. Dyslexia and the Bilingual Student: Towards the Use of Holistic Assessment Measures
in the Dyslexia Referral Process. Paper proposal for the annual meeting of AERA, Philadelphia, PA (2014). Accepted.

Turner, L. and Linan-Thompson, S. Cross-Linguistic Influences in Writing: An Examination of Bidirectional Linguistic
Transfer in the Writing of Emergent Bilingual Students. Paper proposal for the annual meeting of AAAL, Portland, OR
(2014). Accepted.

Turner, L. and Ortiz, A. Cross-Linguistic Analysis of Writing: Implications for Linguistically Responsive Assessment and
Instruction for ELLs. Paper proposal for the annual meeting of NABE, San Diego, CA (2014). Accepted.

WORKS IN PROGRESS

Rosa, J. (2019). Looking Like a Language Sounding Like A Race: Raciolinguistic Ideologies and the Learning of
Latinidad. New York: Oxford University Press. (Book Review)

RESEARCH EXPERIENCE/INTERESTS

Ongoing research in bilingual special education serving as a critical examination of the adverse effects of language and
education policy on the emergent bilingual population in public schools, resulting in issues of over and
underrepresentation in special education programs; analyzing the identification, assessment and placement of emergent
bilingual students in special education programs and commenting on the increased use of standardized testing in
linguistically complex content areas as a decisive means to measure the academic achievement of emergent bilinguals.
Particularly interested in the effects of aggressive accountability measures versus the use of holistic, multilingual
assessment methods in a changing national policy context.

Research interests: Bilingual Special Education and Bilingualism/Linguistics focus

Holistic assessment of emergent bilinguals in the pre-referral and referral process to receive special education services,
particularly in writing assessment- taking into account student use of bilingual strategies as a resource (bidirectional phonetic
and syntactic transfer, code-switching) in order to expand current frames of reference regarding biliteracy development and
language acquisition, in addition to issues of overrepresentation.

Cross-linguistic influences in emergent bilingual writing, code-switching in writing; utilization of bilingual strategies
(bidirectional syntactic transfer, bidirectional phonetic transfer, inter-sentential and intra-sentential code-switching).

Bidirectional linguistic transfer and the intralanguage development process, bilingual/biliteracy and
plurilingual/pluriliteracy development, bilingualism, translanguaging.

Dialectology and sociolinguistics, language variation, languages in contact, languages and power—teacher and societal
perceptions/ideologies surrounding bilingualism/multilingualism and language variation.

Page 2 of 3TRANSLATION PORTFOLIO

Ongoing collection of literary and non-literary translations completed throughout the course of professional and
educational career. Portfolio contains examples of translations in both Spanish-English and English-Spanish translation
sets, in addition to highlighting a wide range of translation skills in diverse fields.

PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

American Educational Research Association (AERA)

National Association of Bilingual Education (NABE)

American Association of Applied Linguistics (AAAL)

Association Internationale de Linguistique Appliquée (International Association of Applied Linguistics) (AILA)

Languages
English, Spanish

Page 2 of 3