The University of Texas at Austin ~ College of Communication

J 360wF/J 160wG: Journalism Internship
Summer 2020

Faculty Supervisor: Dr. Kris Wilson, kris.wilson@austin.utexas.edu

J 360K Prerequisites: J 301F; J 310 and J 311F with a grade of B- or better; Upper Division Standing;
minimum GPA of 2.25.
J 160G Prerequisites: J 331K or J 360F

All internships require approval of the Journalism Internship Faculty Supervisor.
PLEASE NOTE: The College of Communication allows a maximum of four (4) internship credit hours.

The following steps must be completed by the 4** Class Day, Tuesday June 9:
1. Download and save this course syllabus.
2. Review the Professional Conduct, Proper Attire & Sexual Harassment Guidelines.

(http://communication.utexas.edu/ccs/professional-conduct)

3. Register for J 360wWF/160wG (as appropriate).

Secure an internship.

5. Submit the online Internship Application (http://communication.utexas.edu/students/journalism-
internship-courses). Students who have not submitted their completed applications by the 6th class
day will be dropped from the J 360wF/160wG class roster.

>

The Student Services Coordinator will contact you via email with the final decision regarding your internship.
You will not receive credit for J 360F/160G unless your internship has been approved.

ACCEPTABLE TYPES OF INTERNSHIPS
The internship host organization or supervisor must be a full-time journalism practitioner with considerable
experience and, preferably, membership in a journalistic organization such as: The Society of Professional
Journalists, National Association of Broadcasters, American Society of Magazine Editors, The American Copy
Editors Society, or National Press Photographers Association.
Generally internships for journalism academic credit must have/offer:

e Specific beginning and end dates consistent with fall, soring or summer semester.

e The host employer company/organization is bonded and/or holds sufficient business and liability
insurance to cover students interning with that employer and on their business premises or while on
assignment for that employer off-site while completing his/her tasks as an intern.

e Direct, on-site supervision by a working professional currently active in and with considerable journalism
experience directly related to the work to be performed by the intern is preferred, BUT GIVEN THE
COVID-19 PANDEMIC REMOTE INTERNSHIPS WITH REGULAR MENTORING ARE ACCECTABLE.

e The intern must be engaged in some kind of meaningful journalism related activities in a formal
office/work setting (not remotely or at home-office).

e The host employer must provide all resources, workspace, and tools for the student-intern to complete
assigned internship tasks/projects.

e¢ Aminimum of 150 work hours in the semester for the intern.

e Acommitment to give interns substantive experience in the field, which can be documented in student’s
internship report, including work samples.

e Acommitment to evaluate the intern’s performance at the midpoint and end of the semester, providing
constructive and meaningful advice and feedback.The University of Texas at Austin ~ College of Communication

The acceptability of your internship will be evaluated using the position description provided as part of your
internship application.
With the continuing evolution of multimedia journalism and telecommuting, AND IN THE AGE OF
CORONOAVIRUS, the School of Journalism finds itself confronted with internship situations that require a more
flexible set of criteria governing off-site work by interns. Any intern wanting to earn internship credit in such a
situation must provide, in writing from his/her internship professional supervisor, assurances concerning:
e Supervision — the intern shall be guaranteed regular (at least daily) contact with his/her supervisor.
e Feedback — the intern shall be guaranteed, detailed, regular written communication and critique of
his/her work by the supervisor or appropriate designee.
e Duties — the intern shall secure a written list of the intern’s duties prior to securing permission from the
appropriate faculty supervisor.
e Objectives — the intern shall secure at list of internship objectives prior to securing permission from the
appropriate faculty supervisor.
e Portfolio — the intern shall not engage in any internship that does not provide samples for the intern’s
career portfolio.
These assurances will be provided in addition to any and all requirements for the internship course, its reporting
procedures and duties for professional supervisors. No internship credit application will be approved until all of
the above have been fulfilled. The internship faculty supervisor of record still reserves the right to issue a
pass/fail grade as he determines best.

MINIMUM NUMBER OF WORK HOURS
To receive academic credit for your journalism internship, you must complete a minimum of 150 work hours
with the host organization. During the fall and spring semesters this generally means about 10-15 hours per
week for 10-15 weeks. During the summer semester this generally means about 15-25 hours per week for 6-10
weeks. All internship hours must be completed by Friday August 14.

EMAIL COMMUNICATION
All informational communication regarding the internship course will be delivered via EMAIL and Canvas.
Canvas will also be used for announcements, lesson modules, and submission of journal reports and links to
work samples. For this reason, it is important to have a viable email address and access to your course on
Canvas. If the student's email inbox is full or not accepting course informational email at any point during the
program, it is solely the student's responsibility to meet all internship deadlines.

INTERNSHIP INFORMATION

More information about journalism internships can be found online at: https://utdata.github.i0/utjschool-

internships/ Important information about internships in general, especially for remote work during the

COVID-19 SITUATION, can be found here: https://moody.utexas.edu/students/internships

MIDTERM EVALUATION & JOURNAL REVIEW — DUE WEDNESDAY JULY 8 BY 5PM
At the mid-point of the semester, your internship site supervisor will receive via email a Midterm Evaluation of
your performance. Also, you must submit your journal entries on Canvas for the Midterm Journal Review. Your
journal entries will be reviewed in order to better evaluate your writing, your use of journal specifications and
your progression in the internship. Included in the midterm review of your journal should be all entries through
JULY 7. Your journal entries should not only detail what you are doing in your internship, but more importantly
your reactions to your duties, work environment, connections to your journalism degree, etc (see page 3).
Submit your journals to your assigned faculty supervisor via Canvas.The University of Texas at Austin ~ College of Communication

Interns can schedule individual meetings with their Journalism Internship Faculty Supervisor immediately
following the midterm evaluation and journal review. During this optional meeting time you will have the
Opportunity to discuss your internship activities/experience and share any concerns about your internship’s
progress. Once materials are received, a Doodle poll sign up for ZOOM or phone meetings will be available for
these optional meetings. A midterm meeting may be required if the supervisor evaluation and/or journal review
indicate issues that need to be addressed for the second half of the internship.

FINAL INTERNSHIP REPORT — DUE FRIDAY AUGUST 14 BY 5PM

Your Internship Report will be submitted on Canvas and must consist of the following four items:

1. Cover Page: Name; UT EID; Dates of Internship; Company Name; Name of Supervisor; Company History,
Structure/Organization and Mission/Purpose.

2. Journal: Include all weekly journal entries, along with your work hours for each week. See details on
Page 4.

3. Work Samples: Compile at least five (5) samples of your work. See details on Page 4. Please provide on-
line links for any video, audio and multimedia materials.

4. Resume: An updated resume with the addition of your internship experience.

5. Digital portfolio. All journalism majors should have a professional website featuring their resume,
biographical information and work samples. Your resume should include the URL for this website.

The Journalism office will send your internship site supervisor the Final Supervisor Evaluation of your
performance. This is online Qualtrics survey. Please make sure your supervisor address is correct and alert them
to look for the survey one week before it is due (and to check their spam folder if they can’t locate it).

END OF SEMESTER MEETING WITH FACULTY SUPERVISOR
WEEK OF AUGUST 18-20
Interns will schedule with their Journalism Internship Faculty Supervisor for an individual meeting for the end of
semester evaluation, journal review and review of work samples and updated resume. During this meeting time
you will have the opportunity to discuss your internship activities/experience and share any final thoughts about
the internship experience. Once all final materials are submitted you will be able to sign up on a Doodle poll for
either a ZOOM or phone call meeting AUGUST 18-20.

JOURNAL SPECIFICATIONS
Please include your weekly work hours and ensure that your journals are weekly, reflective and comprehensive
narratives. A comprehensive journal not only includes information on assignments and tasks you are given, but
also your impression of the company/industry and the staff at your internship. Journals are used to evaluate the
quality of the credit-based internship, your writing skills and your reflection of the experience as a whole, so
please be aware that any incomplete journal may receive an "X" (Incomplete) grade. Length of each journal
entry will depend on your weekly experiences and activities. Some journal topic suggestions are: What are your
regular internship activities? Are you doing what you thought you would be doing as an intern? Is this a
valuable/positive experience? What do you think of your company? Is this the type of environment you see
yourself in within the next 3 years? What are the interesting aspects of your office - environment or projects?
How is your work being used in the company? What problems arise in the office (with clients or within the
department)? How do the staff members deal with them? What challenges have you faced? How have you dealt
with them? How do the staff members in your office interact? How do the staff members perceive you? Are you
considered a valuable team member? What are the different roles in your office?The University of Texas at Austin ~ College of Communication

WORK SAMPLE SPECIFICATIONS
Your work samples should include at least five (5) examples of the work you have completed during your
internship. Some examples of work samples include: stories, research, layouts, articles, transcripts,
spreadsheets, correspondence, flyers, press releases, media lists, press kits, pitch letters, soeeches, contracts
(be sure to black out any confidential info, or submit a blank copy), videos (DVDs or URLs), CDs with audio or
visual clips, photos, call sheets, log sheets and script coverage. Each work sample should have a short
description of your role in that work sample or how you used the sample. If you have questions about the work
samples, please contact the Internship Course Manager.

GRADING/EVALUATION
This is a pass/fail class. Properly submitted Reports will be graded "CR" (credit). Incomplete or otherwise
improperly submitted reports will be graded either "F" (fail) or "X" (incomplete). If you are given an "X"
(incomplete), you will be given until the 12" class day of the following semester to properly complete the Final
Internship Report for re-evaluation and grade change. If the 12°" class day deadline is not met, any "X"
(incomplete) grades will automatically be converted to "F" (fail).

ASSISTANCE WITH RESUME WRITING & INTERVIEWING
Communication Career Services can assist you with crafting your resume and in developing your interviewing
skills. CCS is located in BMC 2.302. Phone: 512.471.9421. Web site: http://communication.utexas.edu/ccs

CONTACT INFORMATION
Journalism Internship Faculty Supervisor: (Office hours are by appointment only.)
Dr. Kris Wilson, Associate Director, School of Journalism
512-471-4975; BMC 3.334; kris.wilson@austin.utexas.edu

Senior Administrative Associate, Office of Undergraduate Education: Colleen Morgan
Email: comm-studentservices@austin.utexas.edu

University Policies: Academic Integrity Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas
Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, | shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas
that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will
be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the

following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php

Q Drop Policy: If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six
Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdro

Personal Pronouns: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. | will gladly honor
your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so
that | may make appropriate changes to my records.The University of Texas at Austin ~ College of Communication

University Resources for Students: Your success in this class is important. If there are aspects of this course that
prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. If you have medical
information that you need to share with me please let me know. | am committed to creating an effective
learning environment for all students, but | can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible.
| promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students
with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).

Counseling and Mental Health Center: Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well,
exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you
achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not
alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is
learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.

If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or

depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html

Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL
(the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right — it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.

Title IX Reporting

Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free
from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university
can:

1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.

2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or

have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.

Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. |am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If
you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and
resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.

Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity,
and gender expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity.

Office for Inclusion and Equity https://equity.utexas.edu/