Dr. Dan Pryor

125 Woodard Sir. #A 203 Austin, Texas 78749
469.274.4984 dan.pryor@pryorworks.com

Collaborative, creative individual with a variety of experiences serving as a manager and senior faculty
member at the Center for Creative Leadership, working internally in two Fortune 500 organizations, fifteen
years as an independent leadership development consultant/coach working with large organizations,
educational institutions, not-for-profit organizations, religious institutions, and small businesses.

Skilled in:

Organizational Development

Communication and Interpersonal Skills

Program Design & Needs Assessment

360 Degree Feedback

Understanding a Diverse, Changing
Workforce

Leadership Development

Executive Learning, Growth and Change
Organizational Change

Facilitation and Group Process
Creativity & Problem Solving

Servant Leadership

Successfully consulted with business and organization professionals throughout the United States as well
as parts of Australia, Canada and Europe. Committed to facilitating workable, practical leadership and
organizational development solutions.

Professional Assignments

Howard Payne University, New Braunfels and Brownwood, Texas (2012-present)
Assistant Professor, School of Business
e Teach MBA courses in Leadership, Communication and Management

The University of Texas, Austin, Texas (2014 to present)
e Teach Undergraduate Casses in Business Communication

St. Edwards University, Austin, Texas (2009 to present)
Adjunct Professor, Organizational Communication
e Teach courses in Training & Development as well as Small Group Communication & Team Building.

Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas (2010 to present)
Adjunct Professor, McCoy School of Business Administration
e Instructor in Business Communication

Electronic Data Systems (EDS), Plano, Texas (2007-2008)

Senior Management of Change Consultant

e  Collaborated with external organizations anticipating or experiencing significant organizational
change including new procedures, processes or policies, downsizing, mergers and layoffs.

« Coached leaders and managers regarding learning, growth and change.

° Facilitated team and client decision-making and strategy sessions.

University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas (2006-2007)

Senior Lecturer, Professional Communication

° Instructor of undergraduate and graduate courses focusing on writing, public presentation, ethics and
the dynamics of organizational life.

e« Students were Information Technology (IT) and Electrical Engineering (EE) majors. The graduate
classes were composed primarily of students representing diverse countries including India, China,
Hong Kong, South Korea, Turkey, Iraq, Iran, Mexico and Uzbekistan.

Pryor Works, Dallas, Texas (1991-2006)

Private Consulting Practice

° Provided a variety services to organizations related to individual and organizational learning, growth
and change.° Delivered presentations and workshops on career development, learning styles, value systems,
giving and receiving effective feedback, values change (Spiral Dynamics), derailment and
interpersonal skill development.

e« Additional activities included individual assessment for development (860 feedbacks), group
facilitation, program and training material design, career development consultation and personal
coaching. Designed Prism, a 360 feedback process for clergy.

° Periodically served as an adjunct professor at Collin County Community College, Mountain View
College in Dallas, the University of North Texas and Truett Seminary at Baylor University in Waco,
Texas. Courses included basic communication, leadership, management, conflict management and
the minister as manager.

Baylor University, Waco Texas (1988-1991)

Hankamer School of Business, Assistant Professor of Management

° Instructor, management and leadership courses.

¢« Supervised four faculty members in the design and delivery of a required junior level innovative
course blending leadership, ethics and “savvy.”

Center for Creative Leadership (CCL), Greensboro, North Carolina (1985-1988)

Manager of New Technologies and Senior Lead Faculty member

¢« — Trained, facilitated and marketed the leadership development simulation, Looking Glass, Inc.™
(LGI). Facilitated over 100 LGI sessions and trained almost 50 facilitators.

e — Participated in the rollout of Benchmarks™, the 360-degree feedback instrument--including
marketing, one-on-one feedback interpretation, certification of trainers and co-authoring the original
development guide.

° Upon leaving CCL, continued as a senior adjunct consultant for over a decade.

Atlantic Richfield Company, Dallas and Houston, Texas (1980-1985)

Management Training Specialist & Human Resource Planning Consultant

° Designed and instructed training programs in communication, assertiveness, conflict, supervisory
skills, personal values and motivation—and middle-management training programs.

e Consulted with internal clients on a variety of issues including developmental planning, conflict
resolution, employee complaints, curriculum design, team building and organizational development.

° Provided problem-solving support and coaching to functional groups throughout the organization.

Sample Accomplishments

e ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Over a period of a year, worked cooperatively with highly
experienced internal consultants at a large faith-based organization, helping it move from an “expert
model” of consulting to a “facilitative approach” to consulting. The new, facilitative approach was
based on client needs, not consultant expertise.

° DESIGN: Facilitated the redesign of a required “diversity training experience” for a multi-national
corporation. Created by a UK corporate staff, the workshop was not culturally in-tune with the cultural
needs and perspectives of the North American workforce. Working with internal organizational
consultants, the design met the work realities of North Americans while meeting the integrity and
control needs of the UK staff. The training was presented successfully at company sites in the United
States, Canada and Australia.

e SALES and MARKETING: As Manager of New Technologies at the Center for Creative Leadership
in Greensboro, NC increased sales of the behavioral simulation, Looking Glass. In less than three
years sales increased from $500,000 a year to nearly two million dollars a year.

« COMMUNICATOR: Write and published the newsletter Soeedbumps—a collection of notions on
leadership, change, learning, creativity, vocation, spirit, organizational life and humor. Authored
approximately 15 articles on learning & development, servant leadership, change, vocational calling
and changing values systems as they relate to learning styles. Received the University of North
Texas Communication and Public Address Alumni Award. A regular columnist for the National
Attention Deficient Association e-newsletter (ADD.org)

e COOPERATIVE: Working with a superior, two colleagues and the divisional executive leadership
team of a Fortune 500 company created and implemented a Performance Management System.
This project included the design of a Job Clarity and Performance Appraisal process and the writing

2of all support materials. Virtually 100% of the division’s executive leadership, managers, individual
contributors and support staff participated in the newly created process—a 70% increase in
utilization.

Education
Doctor of Education (College Teaching/Interpersonal and Public Communication)
University of North Texas, Denton, Texas (1982).

Masters of Science (Interpersonal and Public Communication/Education)
University of North Texas, Denton, Texas (1976).

Bachelor of Science (Secondary Education/Speech Communication)
University of North Texas, Denton, Texas (1978).