Reality Capture for Architecture

 

Instructor: Robert Stepnoski, Senior Lecturer, RP rob@Qaustin.utexas.edu
UT School of Architecture
Office Hours: Virtual Monday — Friday 10-4

     

Ye ea gee
P ae a dee

Selection of Historic Landmarks

description ARC F380C (70404) ARC F328R (70388) LAR F381R (70673)
This class instructs students on the technologies of Reality Capture, understanding 3D Point Clouds, and their
application to Architecture. Students will study Digital Heritage Preservation of Historic Landmarks in Austin with
multiple technologies (LIDAR / Photogrammetry) and create computer models of the environment. The class will
contrast the technologies to help students understand when and how to use them for architectural projects.
Students will immerse in understanding the Art of The Point Cloud and learn presentation technique with Point
Cloud Datasets.

learning objectives
Insight on how to deploy 3D Laser Scanning technologies in the field
Discuss the Theory and Science of Photogrammetry
Process photogrammetric models to visualize and analyze 3D Point Clouds
Insight on how to capture a site with UAVs (drones) flight for photogrammetry
Learn methods for UAV driven aerial photogrammetry and documentation
Discuss implementing scanning and photogrammetric methods is used in contemporary professional practice
Enable students to select the best data capture technique for any given research scenario

skills to be explored
Demonstrate competence in using point clouds from LIDAR and Photogrammetry.
Understand how to use reality capture systems to create fast/accurate computer models of existing structures
Be able to select the proper technology to suit a project's needs.
Gain understanding of how to use a computer model to better understand a historic structure.

meetings & time commitment

The class meets virtually Tuesdays and Thursdays from 12:15pm — 4:00 pm. Virtual office hours are 10-4 Mon-Fri,
and workshop help can be arranged as needed. It is expected that a minimum of 4 - 6 hours outside of the regularly
scheduled class meeting time will be necessary to prepare and complete the assignments.

e Module 1: Welcome (Week 1: Thursday June 4)
Oo Module 1, Session 1.0: Synchronous Lecture: Course Introduction & Overview
o Module 1, Session 1.1: Historic Site Point Clouds Around Austin
=» Student Hardware/Software check.
=  Pix4D Student License Distribution
= Is Pix4D, Recap, 3DS Max, Revit working?
=» Have you made a successful connection to the UT VPN?
= Are you able to access the Course Share?
o Discussion:
o Feedback:
=» Module 1, Assignment 1.0: Reading — Digital Heritage Preservation
=» Module 1, Assignment 1.2: Field Work — Site SearchReality Capture for Architecture 2

e Module 2 (Week 2: Tuesday June 9): Digital Heritage Preservation
o Discuss Module 1 Assignments: Concerns, Q/A
o Module 2, Session 2.0: Synchronous Lecture: Digital Heritage Preservation
o Narrated Lecture: A Brief Photogrammetry History
=» Module 2, Exercise 2.0: Pix4D — First Look Overview
=» Module 2, Exercise 2.1: Pix4D — Getting Started
=» Module 2, Exercise 2.2: Pix4D — Georeferencing
=» Module 2, Exercise 2.3: Pix4D — Measurements
=» Module 2, Exercise 2.4: Pix4D — Tie Points
=» Module 2, Exercise 2.5: Pix4D — Reducing Processing Time
o Discussion:
Feedback:
Oo Module 2, Assignment 2.1: Reading — Point Cloud Preservation Plans
=" Continue your course project site search

O

e Module 3 (Week 2: Thursday June 11): Photogrammetry (Aerial & Terrestrial)
o Discuss Module 2 Assignments: Concerns, Q/A
o Module 3, Session 3.1: Synchronous Lecture: Photogrammetry (Aerial & Terrestrial)
o Module 3, Session 3.2: Reality Capture Workshop Session Part 1 of 2
=» Module 3 Exercise 3.0: Pix4D — Further Look Overview
=» Module 3, Exercise 3.1: Pix4D — Point Cloud Project Merge
=» Module 3, Exercise 3.2: Pix4D — Mosaic Editor
=» Module 3, Exercise 3.3: Pix4D — Animating Your Project
# Module 3, Exercise 3.4: Pix4D —DSM, DTM, Contour Lines
=» Module 3, Exercise 3.5: Pix4D — Editing The 3D Point Cloud
o Discussion:
o Feedback:
=» Module 3, Assignment 3.0: Video Collection Basics
=» Module 3, Assignment 3.1: Field Work - Toe In Water

e Module 4 (Week 3: Tuesday June 16): Further Photogrammetry (Aerial & Terrestrial)

Discuss Module 3 Assignments: Concerns, Q/A

Module 4, Session 4.1: Synchronous Lecture: Further Photogrammetry (Aerial & Terrestrial)

Module 4, Session 4.2: Reality Capture Workshop Session Part 2 of 2

Module 4, Exercise 1.1: Aerial Photogrammetry Demo

Discussion:

Feedback:
=» Module 4, Assignment 4.0: Reading — Classifying Buildings from Point Clouds and Images
=» Module 4, Assignment 4.1: Processing — Classify a 3D Point Cloud Dataset

Oo O00 0 0

e Module 5 (Week 3: Thursday June 18): 3D Laser Scanning LiDAR

o Discuss Module 4 Assignments: Concerns, Q/A

o Module 5, Session 5.0: 3D Laser Scanning LiDAR Basics

o Module 5, Session 5.1: Synchronous Guest Lecture: Larry Kleinkemper, AIA
=» Module 5, Exercise 5.1: Recap - 3D Laser Scanning LiDAR First Look Overview
=» Module 5, Exercise 5.2: Recap 3D Laser Scanning LiDAR
=» Module 5, Exercise 5.3: Recap 3D Point Cloud Import
=» Module 5, Exercise 5.4: Video: 3D Scanning DemoReality Capture for Architecture 3

o Discussion:
o Feedback:
=» Module 5, Assignment 5.0: Field Work - Now That Your Feet Are Wet

Module 6 (Week 4: Tuesday June 23): Understanding 3D Point Clouds in Practice

o Discuss Module 5 Assignments: Concerns, Q/A

o Module 6, Session 6.0: Synchronous Lecture: Understanding 3D Point Clouds in Practice
=» Module 6, Exercise 6.0: 3DS Max - 3D Point Cloud Import
=» Module 6, Exercise 6.1: Revit — 3D Point Cloud Import

o Discussion:

o Feedback:
=» Module 6, Assignment 6.0:

e Module 7 (Week 4: Thursday June 25): Combining 3D Laser Scanning LiDAR & Photogrammetry
o Discuss Module 6 Assignments: Concerns, Q/A
o Module 7, Session 7.0: Synchronous Lecture: Combining 3D Laser Scanning LIDAR & Photogrammetry
o Discussion:
o Feedback:
=» Module 7, Assignment 7.0: Field Work - The Deep End
=» Module 7 Assignment 7.1: Combining the point clouds

e Module 8 (Week 5: Tuesday June 30): The Art of the Point Cloud
o Discuss Module 7 Assignments: Concerns, Q/A
o Module 8 Session 8.0: Synchronous Lecture: The Art Of the Point Cloud
o Discussion:
o Feedback:
=» Module 8, Assignment 8.0: Building your own Point Cloud Art & Drawing

e Module 9 (Week 5: Thursday July 2): Presentation Techniques using Multimedia Video
o Discuss Module 8 Assignments: Concerns, Q/A
o Module 9 Session 9.0: Synchronous Lecture: Creating Multimedia Presentations with Point Cloud Datasets
= Module 9, Exercise 9.0: Adobe Premiere / Resolve Lecture
o Discussion:
o Feedback:
=» Module 9, Assignment 9.0: Storyboard Video with Point Clouds. Gathering your datasets.

e Module 10 (Week 6: Tuesday July 7): Review Prep
o End Review Preparation: Students development of their datasets, findings, and interpretations.

e End Review (Week 6: Thursday July 9): Review
o End Review: Student presentation of work, findings, and interpretations in multimedia video and slideshow
format.

required texts
Readings/Tutorials will be assigned at each Module.

required hardware/software
Laptop or Desktop with sufficient resources to run the design software currently at the School of Architecture

https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/SOAdigitech/Hardware+Recommendations+-+Design+StudentsReality Capture for Architecture 4

Software:
e §=Pix4D https://www.pix4d.com
oO Pix4D has provided the class with free student licensing

e Autodesk Recap, Revit, 3DS Max, AutoCAD https://www.autodesk.com/education/free-software/featured

e Meshroom https://alicevision.org/#meshroom

additional requirements (optional)

Smartphone, camera, or DSLR to support the Terrestrial Photogrammetry capture portion of the course. Students are
NOT asked to bring a UAV (drone) or 3D Scanner, this will be demonstrated, and datasets provided given the
circumstances of this time.

progress:
Everyone is starting out at differing levels of proficiency therefore your grade will be based on relative progress.

attendance:

With the exception of faculty exemption or an excused absence, class attendance is mandatory. The minimum penalty for
more than two [2] unexcused absences is a full letter drop in the final grade for the course. Students should contact the
instructor prior to class if they expect to be absent or late.

Absences based on religious observances must be arranged fourteen [14] days in advance. Any work missed during that
time must be turned in within one week [7 days] of the absence. A student who fails to complete missed work within the
time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.

Attendance is expected for all lectures, field trips, studio sessions, and discussions. If a class meeting has to be
rescheduled, it will be done in a timely manner, with the intention of accommodating the majority of the course
participants' schedules.

grade percentage

¢ class participation [25% of course grade]
Each student is expected to participate actively in the discussion of the required readings each week. Occasional in-
class opinion surveys of will be given and the results discussed among seminar participants. Readings should be
completed two days before class to allow time for reflection.

¢ 3D Laser Scanning Models [15% of course grade]
Intent. Method application. Resulting model from LIDAR.

¢« Photogrammetry Models [35% of course grade]

Intent. Method application. Resulting model from photogrammetry.

Interpretation and comprehension for historic preservation. [25% of course grade]

Students will work to create a presentation of what they learned about their historic structures from the different

technologies and to make recommendations about how to best preserve and develop the site.

grade scale
Final grades will be computed in accordance with School of Architecture and University Academic Policies as follows:

grade work quality performance level points

A excellent project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, 4.0
appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor, craft,
and personal development. Student pursues concepts and
techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
complete on all levels.Reality Capture for Architecture 5

A- 3.67
B+ 3.33
B good project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and 3.0

successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions
presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects.
Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for

excellence.
B- 2.67
C+ 2.33
C required project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in 2.0

class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. Project is incomplete
in one or more areas.

C- 1.67

D poor project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills, model- 1.0
making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill
and knowledge base.

F unacceptable project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. 0.0
Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be
assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.

X excused issued only in the case of compelling, nonacademic circumstances
incomplete beyond the student's control. Simply not completing work on time is

an inadequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be
used after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with
an agreement as to a new completion date. According to School of
Architecture policy, studio work must be completed before the
second week of the next design semester in which the student is
enrolling.

Any grade can be re-evaluated based on student concern. Subsequent evaluations can cause the grade to be reduced,
remain unchanged, or increased. Grades can only be discussed on an individual basis, not as a comparison with other
students’ grades.

reading and writing skills

As a seminar, this course is discussion and technology intensive. Students are expected to participate actively in all
discussions. If you are not confident in your English language skills, it is recommended that you go to the University's
International Office and meet with someone in ESL Services to discuss classes or workshops that can help you.

academic integrity

Plagiarism or violations of academic integrity in any form will be handled according to measures as outlined by the
General Information catalog and the University. All course related work submitted for evaluation is to be original and
prepared without unauthorized assistance. Work that is supplemented from ideas not originating from the student should
clearly cite the parent source.

Students who violate University rules on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary action, including the receipt of aReality Capture for Architecture 6

failing grade for the course, and possible dismissal from the University. Since such infractions harm the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced.

accommodations

Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a specific physical need. You will be
requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Students’ Office, in order that the most appropriate accommodations
can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus through the Services for Students with Disabilities
Office [512.471.6259 or 512.471.4641 http://www.deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/J.

university of texas honor code

The core value of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honest, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.

documented disability statement

The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students
with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-232-
2937 (video phone).

use of e-mail for official correspondence

Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your
email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current
with university-related communications, some of which can be time critical. You can find UT Austin's policies and
instructions for updating your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.

religious holidays

By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to
observe a religious holy day, you will have the opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.

behavior concerns advice line (bcal)

If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by
phone your concerns about another individual's behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office
of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP),
and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.

faculty contact information

office location: Virtual

office hours: | Monday — Friday 10-4
email: rob@austin.utexas.edu

Office hours will be maintained at stated times, as well as by appointment, in order to discuss issues related to the
schedule, evaluation, coursework, etc. Please do not hesitate to notify the instructor of impending schedule conflicts with
other classes.