ARC 521E INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO IV: ENVIRONMENTAL Spring 2020
MWE 1-5pm

Instructor: Nichole Wiedemann

Office Location: Sutton 3.128

Office Hours: Wednesday 10am-12pm + by appointment
Email: wiedemann(dutexas.edu

ee
Beh
j es os

ut = .
5 <tc

 

a nade ES ae
Cheonggyecheon Restoration Project (elevated highway removal) Seoul, Korea

STITCH | austin

What is the future of urban highways? What will become of I-35?
Bury it?
Bridge it?

Or?

STUDIO DESCRIPTION_ Austin’s I-35 is considered one of the most congested corridors in Texas with an
estimated quarter of a million cars each day. With about a 1000 people moving to Texas daily, and an
average net migration of 100 persons per day to Austin, demand for mobility continues to increase for the
foreseeable future. As well, like many other cities around the country, TxDOT is weighing the costs of the
expected repairs [or reconstruction) of an interstate highway system that is aging and nearing the end of
its lifespan. For many, this is an opportunity to increase the capacity -bigger is better’- to facilitate
more cars moving faster to farther away.

Yet how do we decide our best path forward? In considering the past, present and soon to be future for I-35 in
the downtown area, what is the criteria for assessment? Cost? Vehicles? Time? Ecological impacts? Health?
Social benefits ? Economic effects? Happiness ? Other?The planning (and purchasing of right of ways) was underway for the “interregional highway,” or I-35,
starting in 1946. Aligned with the former East Avenue, the completion of the interstate in 1962, and an
upper deck in 1975, served to magnify (cement) the boundary that isolated East Austin residents,
predominately Mexican Americans and African Americans, from the rest of the city.

After suffering the repercussions of the 1928 “redlining” (a discriminatory practice by which services -
loans, insurance, etc.- are refused or limited in a specific geographic area) that segregated the people
and wealth (and potential) within the city, East Austin now faces rapid gentrification. Austin continues to
see a decline in the African American population, specifically East Austin, while the being the fastest
growing major metropolitan area in the country for the last eight years.

As architects, can we help shape this wicked problem and its possible solutions? Do we have a voice?

This Intermediate Studio will grapple with the complexity of Capital Express project in order to present
other futures for downtown Austin. Students will explore infrastructure, in a multivalent manner, in order
to try to address the consequences of the rapid growth of a city, including concerns for housing and the
public realm, through design.

 

STUDIO STRUCTURE + SCHEDULE_ Our work will include the following formats:

Case Study_ is a form of qualitative research employing an intensive study of an executed design ina
specific context. Through first-hand experiences [sometimes] and references, students will research
housing and mixed-use typologies in order to understand the impact of different designers, sites,
constraints and culture.

Analysis_ is a close examination, often a separation into components, which may provide a deeper
understanding. A variety of analytic techniques will be used to better understand the particularities of the
city and the corresponding site. The analysis is meant to be generative in understanding and, eventually,
designing the city.

Research_ is to study something methodically. The studio will investigate “urbanism” (the characteristic
way of life for city dwellers) from varying perspectives.

Urban and Building Strategies_ includes designing the relationship, or play, between the various
components that constitute housing and the public realm. The studio will engage multiple scales -large
(city), medium (building) and small (unit]- in order to understand the impact of the small in the big and
the big in the small.

Dialogue_ is the exchange [or debate] of ideas or positions on a particular issue. To enhance dialogue,
please look for opportunities -formal and informal- to engage your fellow classmates in discussion.

Assignment #1a + 1b: CASE STUDY_ Diagram [2 weeks]

wk 1-3 + 3-4_ 20% of final grade team

pin up/discuss: 02.03.20, 02.07.20 and 02.10.20

Engaging both research and speculation, the studio will engage the potential of architecture (housing)
and (post-highway?) infrastructure within the city. Examining both text (writing) and image
(drawings/models and built work), students will access the intent or critical position of the work.

Assignment #2: UNITs_ Assembly [1 week]

wk 3_ 5% of final grade individual/team

pin up: 02.14.20

Building upon the first assignment, students will critique, test and adapt the components of housing. With
an understanding of the overall assemblage, a unique perspective on the housing unit, both interior and
exterior, will be derived from the city of Austin.Assignment #3: SITE_Analysis (1.5 weeks]

wk 5_ 10% of final grade team/individual

Various analytic tools will be used to comprehend the impact of I-35 (past, present and future] in relation
to the adjacent areas in East Austin and Downtown.

Assignment #4: STITCH_Urban Strategy (3 weeks]

wk 6-8_ 15% of final grade team

review: 03.11.20

In teams, students will test multivalent infrastructural strategies to STITCH the city together. Each team
is responsible for a critical position in order to assess -evaluate the effectiveness- of the design proposal.

wk 9_ SPRING. BREAK

Assignment #5: BUILD_ Inhabitation [6 weeks]

wk 10-16_ 50% of final grade individual

review: 04.10.20 + final review TBD

During the remainder of the semester, students will work individually, yet in communication their team,
to develop a portion (building+) of the urban strategy.

FINAL REVIEWS: MAY 5, 6 + 7, 2020 [specific date determined by SOA administration]
PORTFOLIO REVIEWS: May 14, 2020

NOTE: While the schedule above reflects the overall structure of the Intermediate Studios, including
research/analysis, design based on precedent and main project, the assignments have been subdivided into 5
parts for clarity of intent and scale.

PREREQUISITES_ ARC 321D (formerly 320D), ARC/ARI 221K, and ARC 415K with a grade of at least C in
each.

CURRICULUM FLAG_ This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are
designed to engage students in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing a student
with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to the
student's major. At least one-third of the grade will be based on independent investigation and
presentation of one’s own work.

INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO_ Students pursuing the Bachelor of Architecture must complete four
Intermediate Design Studios during their second and third years. Building on the Foundation Design
Studios taken during the first year, the goal of the Intermediate Studios Is to prepare students for
Advanced Design Studios in their fourth and fifth years.

Each Intermediate Studio will be structured around one of four broad themes of inquiry (Operational,
Environmental, Integration, and Speculation) and will offer a critical framework and vocabularies for
design and development into key issues emphasized in the theme. Intermediate Studios will also serve as
a platform to prepare students for the range of offerings of the Advanced Studios (e.g. Comprehensive,
Urban Design, Landscape Architecture, etc.]. Intermediate Studios will follow a similar structure, but
each instructor will individually determine the scope and design problem for each studio.

THEME: ENVIRONMENTAL_ This studio emphasizes architecture as a response to context: architecture
and landscape architecture in the city and in nature, urban issues, housing, making place. This studio
should take advantage that students are concurrently enrolled in or have already completed the course
Site Design.LEARNING OUTCOMES _ Students will be exposed to a series of learning goals several times and from
different angles over the four Intermediate Studio sequence. The goal is that similar issues are repeated
from studio to studio but from different angles, allowing students to find, within the diversity of the topics,
a “common thread” as they go through the sequence of the four studios. The level of expectation will
grow as students go from being introduced to an issue, to becoming competent at it. Some issues would
be only mentioned in passing In one studio but will be studied in more depth in another.

e Design Composition Skills: Developed through three-dimensional architectural form and space,
both exterior and interior; building envelope

e Design Integration Skills: Demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of materiality,
structures, construction, and environmental system

e Site Analysis and Design: Developed through the creative engagement with relevant contextual;
environmental and programmatic factors underlying the project

e Critical Thinking: Quality of conceptual and critical thought; learning from precedents; research
skills

e Graphic Skills: Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media
strategy and level of skill displayed

e Basic grasp of accessibility and egress

e Collaborative and Leadership Skills: Demonstrated through the active engagement in all activities
of the studio

STUDIO CULTURE_ The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio
learning encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio
offers an environment where students can come together to ask questions and make proposals, which
are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the public-at-large.
Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from faculty members, and provides the
opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking skills and spatial and material
sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where project-based learning
becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and commitment to the school’s core values
— broadmindedness, interconnectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of
architecture's fundamental mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.

https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture

DESIGN CONVERSATIONS_ The School of Architecture offers a wide range of opportunities for students
to extend the design conversations taken place in studios (Lecture Series, Goldsmith Talks, Exhibitions,
etc]. Students are encouraged to participate and be engaged. Specifically, all B.Arch and BSAS students in
studio are expected to attend all the Jessen Lectures (typically three per semester by lead practitioners from
around the world). The lectures and the group discussions in studio that follow are important for the
holistic education of intellectually engaged students and participation will have an impact on students’
grades (see below).

EVALUATION CRITERIA_ While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a
significant portion of each grade is derived from broader and more subjective criteria. Student work will
be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to deductions for
late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.

Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:

Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
e The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method
of inquirye The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch
drawing and models, etc.) in the development of the design

e Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic - Does the student do what Is asked; go beyond what
is asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?

Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in
companion courses.
e Astrong and clearly stated design objective
e Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan - including reasonable disposition of programmatic
elements - and sectional development
e Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated
through creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction,
structural and environmental system integration, building materials and assembly,
sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design objective
e Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness, floor
plates, and assembly

Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in
the final design presentation.
e Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and
level of skill displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process;
technical documentation

Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions
and reviews.

A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree in the
School of Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not satisfy degree
requirements.

GRADE DESCRIPTIONS

A/A- Excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual
language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts
and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all
levels.

B+/B/B- Above Average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed.
Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve
required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for
excellence.

C+/C Average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued
with dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.

C-/D+/D/D- Poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation
are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and
knowledge base.F Fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable.
Note that this grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.

X Excused Incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not
completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only
be used after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement as to a
new completion date. Work must be completed before the second week of the next
semester in which the student is enrolling, according to the School of Architecture policy.

ATTENDANCE_ Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3)
unexcused absences, the student's final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final
grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious
observances, absences are only excused with written documentation of a medical issue or family
emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and
initiating communication with the instructor to determine due dates.

If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1)
unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in
advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to
inform the instructor is not acceptable.

RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES_ A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the
purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that
absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student
is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each
of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.

By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within
a reasonable time after the absence.

ACADEMIC INTEGRITY_ Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor
Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, | shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Representing the work of others as your own, including plagiarism, is
taken very seriously at UT. You must cite your sources when you use the words or ideas of others;
otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of
the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code

which can be found at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php

Q DROP POLICY_ If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you ll need to execute a Q drop
before the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas Institution. For more information,

see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.

PERSONAL PRONOUNS_ Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to
individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation,
gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student'slegal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/}. The instructor will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster and
by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise the instructor of any changes early in
the semester so appropriate updates may be made to their records.

MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES _ Taking care of your general well-being is an important step
in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything
else is getting in your way, there are options available for help:
e In-house CARE counselor (see below]
e For immediate support
o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5** floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
o CMHC Crisis Line:
24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
e Free services at CMHC:
Brief assessments and referral services: https://cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html

O 0 0 O

CARE PROGRAM_ Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE]} Program places licensed mental health
professionals within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health
support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.

Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff
may refer students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please leave a
message if she is unavailable by phone.

Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm]}
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE simpson.html

STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES_ Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must
obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the
Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).
This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and
accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.

http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/

THE SANGER LEARNING CENTER_ All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Learning
Center's classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. More than 20,000 students use the
services at the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance. For more
information, please visit http://ugs.utexas.edu/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).

UNDERGRADUATE WRITING CENTER_hittp://uwc.utexas.edu

BEVOCAL_ BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene
and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on

campus, go to: https://wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal/.BCAL_ Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or
Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be
made anonymously. If something doesn't feel right, it probably isn't. Trust your instincts and share your
concerns.

FOOD PANTRY & CAREER CLOTHES CLOSET_ Student Emergency Services in the Office of the Dean of
Students has launched UT Outpost (UA9 Building, 2609 University Ave; ring bell for service) to support
students on our campus that is equipped with a food pantry, and a career clothes closet to ensure every
Longhorn has access to professional clothes for job and internship interviews. Emergencies and financial
hardships can interfere with student success beyond the classroom, and this program will serve as an

additional resource for students. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/utoutpost.php

TITLE IX REPORTING_ Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination,
sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university
can:

1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.

2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have

become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university's relevant policies:

https://titleix.utexas.edu/policies.

Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters, which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
Your instructor is a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.

Before talking with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether
they are aresponsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate(daustin.utexas.edu. For more information about
reporting options and resources, visit https://titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
titleix(daustin.utexas.edu.

SECURITY, SAFETY, AND THE STUDIO_ The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a
place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray
paint, or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio
that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio
without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studio-mates
accountable for the security of your shared space.

The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and reuse to
reduce material consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or any other
containers with white bags. The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system for students to donate
materials and take what they need for studio and fabrication coursework, is available throughout the
semester to all UT students in the UTSOA Technology Lab. All unwanted, reusable materials should be
brought to the Material Exchange station in the Technology Lab at the end of the semester.EMERGENCY EVACUATION_ In the case of emergency evacuation:

e Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.

e Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the
building.

e Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors.

e Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services
offices.

Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency.

BUILD LAB POLICY_ All students, faculty, and staff who wish to use the UTSOA Build Lab must take the
EHS’‘s online training. As this training is supplemental to UTSOA’s Build Lab training, no one is excluded
or grandfathered from the requirement; both are required in order to use the Build Lab’s tools and
equipment. The Build Lab has a card reader installed at the entrance. Those who have taken the online
EHS training will be able to gain access during operating hours by swiping their UT ID cards at the door.

More information can be found at:
https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/SOABuildLab/Build+Lab+Access+and+Training.

RESOURCES_ A variety of information and tools will be used during the course of the semester.