The Gulf Coast DesignLab — Public Interest Design Advanced Design Studio SUMMER 2020

Instructor: Coleman Coker

Course Description: The semester’s work incorporates a Public Interest Design approach, which is
foundational to the Gulf Coast DesignLab’s practice. https://gulfcoastdesignlab.org/ The studio uses a
hands-on, community interaction approach that empowers students: 1) to acquire social-minded design
approaches by learning how to apply critical thinking to complex social and environmental issues; 2) to
develop new communication/interaction skills that expand your ability to offer better inclusive
community-based design; 3) to identify and employ ways in which architects and planners can help
create well-designed, resilient, and equitable communities that promote dignity for all.

Stakeholder: This summer, the studio will partner with Artist Boat https://www.artistboat.org/

of Galveston TX. Their mission is: 1) to offer science-based environmental education in ways that
increase equity through ecological literacy, while promoting good stewardship habits in times of climate
crisis; 2) to foster civic participation and develop community pride through city-wide, art projects; 3) to
increase conservation of diminished lands on Galveston Island through practicing resiliency and raising
public awareness.

The Gulf Coast DesignLab has worked with Artist Boat in the past, helping expand their public
environmental education programs, which focus primarily on middle, high school students. Many of
these students come to the stakeholder’s Coastal Heritage Preserve from public schools in underserved
neighborhoods. Artist Boat’s work helps increase these student’s understanding of ecological systems
while instructing them how to develop better stewardship practices in this time of climate crisis. Artist
Boat uses outside-the-classroom, hands-on instruction methods, to host students on kayak trips in
coastal wetlands and on eco-literacy walks through their Preserve. There, they foster empowerment, by
teaching our future civic leaders how to make more resilient, ecologically-based communities. To assist
in this, your PID studio will provide new tools for Artist Boat’s outdoors education work. You will work
closely with your stakeholder to develop new interactive education tools, meant to expand Artist Boat’s
environmental education capability. This will be a group effort of the studio, but each student will
individually “build” their designs off-campus. Toward semester’s end, you will also design a greenhouse
complex that Artist Boat is planning for the future. This will be an individual-based design exploration
which will lead to helping your stakeholder acquire funding for a future project that will assist Artist
Boat in restoring coastal prairies at their 1,300 acre property.

The studio will be entirely online. In partnering with a non-profit group, this course offers a unique
opportunity to work in new ways, testing new methods of communication and rethinking the typical
designer/stakeholder relationship. One-on-one discussions with leaders working in the public interest
design field from across the country, group studio discussions and ample instructor-student interaction
are planned, along with readings and exercises describing new ways for designers to interact with the
public. The semester’s work will offer a design problem that is challenging and rewarding, one that
offers a real opportunity for growth. The result will be a re-imagined design/build format that not only
produces imaginative and fulfilling work but will provide you, the designer, new tools to cooperatively
help empower communities through citizen equity and dignity.Required Texts: Selected and provided by instructor.

Prerequisites: verify with your advisor that you have taken required courses necessary for entrance into
advanced design studio.

Because the COVID-19 pandemic makes meeting on campus a potential health hazard, studio work this
semester will be conducted electronically via the internet. Review of your work and studio dialogue will
primarily occur in both asynchronous and synchronous manner through one-on-one discussions with
your instructor as well as periodic group peer input and discussion.

da.

Students will upload your periodic design progress to Box for in-depth review feedback
from the instructor.

To maintain a sense of schedule, individual critique and group discussion will primarily
take place during regularly scheduled studio hours.

During those times you will meet with your instructor online through appointment.

Full online class discussion will occur at times designated by the instructor and as agreed
upon by the class.

2) The extent of exploration and quality of your work should be maintained at a level similar to
what you would have achieved if we were still meeting in studio.

da.

This does not however mean an equivalent ten hours per week is required for online
contact with your instructor and classmates.

Online contact time will be determined in a manner so that there is ample time for
discussion and critique to assure the quality of your exploration.

While a physical model will not be required you are encouraged to make one should you
so choose. For your health safety, materials should be purchased online.

Your final review package should be of the same quality and of the same amount of
content as if we were still meeting in studio.

Graphically produce your final review package digitally in a PDF format.

If you will be unable to participate in your final review at the scheduled time (e.g., for
child- or elder-care needs), notify the instructor two weeks before the scheduled date
so alternate arrangements can be made.

While this new way of learning will take additional efforts of diligence, flexibility, and
alternative means of communication, we will work to facilitate the best possible
outcome for your semester’s investigation.

Learning Outcomes: Students have been exposed to the following learning objectives in previous
semesters. The level of expectation will continue to grow as students further develop each
competency. Some issues would only be mentioned in passing in one studio but will be studied in more
depth in another.

e Design Composition Skills: Developed through three-dimensional architectural form and space,
both exterior and interior; building envelope.

e Design Integration Skills: Demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of materiality,
structures, construction, and environmental system.

e Site Analysis and Design: Developed through the creative engagement with relevant contextual;
environmental and programmatic factors underlying the project.e Critical Thinking: Quality of conceptual and critical thought; learning from precedents; research
Skills.

e Graphic Skills: Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media
strategy and level of skill displayed.

e Collaborative and Leadership Skills: Demonstrated through active engagement in all activities of
the studio.

Required Material: You will need what’s typically required in design studio along with incidental
drawing items such as graphite pencils, charcoal, illustration board, drawing pads and typical model-
making material. Along with these each student is required to furnish their own construction utility belt,
hard hat, safety vest, etc. If you don’t already have these, instructions as to what’s required will be
given.

Required Texts: Selected and provided by instructor.

“On-line” Office hours: 10am -1pm T, W, F and Tu and Thu 11am — 1pm by appointment at
ccoker@austin.utexas.edu

Class recordings: Class recordings are reserved only for the use of members of this class (students, TAs,
and the instructor) and only for educational purposes. Recordings should not be shared outside the class
in any form. Violation of this restriction could lead to Student Misconduct proceedings.

Studio Culture: While students cannot meet on campus, the School of Architecture believes in the value
of continuing the kind of learning that encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and
learning-by-doing. This studio offers a digital environment where students will feel free to come
together, to ask questions and make proposals, which are developed and discussed among classmates,
faculty, visiting professionals, and the studio stakeholder. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one
instruction from faculty members, and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her
critical thinking skills and spatial and material sensibilities. The online design studio offers a synthetic
form of education, where project-based learning becomes the foundation for developing an
understanding of and commitment to the school's core values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity,
professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture's fundamental mission: to
improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture

Evaluation Criteria: While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a
significant portion of each grade is derived from broader and more subjective criteria.

Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are
subject to deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the
instructor.

Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:

Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.e The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method
of inquiry

e The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch
drawing and models, etc.) in the development of the design

e Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic — Does the student do what is asked; go beyond
what is asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?

Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced

in Companion courses.

e A strong and clearly stated design objective

e Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan — including reasonable disposition of programmatic
elements — and sectional development

e Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated
through creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction,
structural and environmental system integration, building materials and assembly,
sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design objective

e Structural competence and material sensitivity

Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in
the final design presentation.
e Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and
level of skill displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process;
technical documentation

Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group
discussions and reviews.

A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree in
the School of Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not satisfy
degree requirements.

Studio Course Grading Guide:

Grading: Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in
other academic areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may be
evaluated, a significant portion of each grade is derived from a broader, more subjective set of

issues. Grading for studio courses is broken into three components for each given mark:

30% Concept: Grasping and implementing the ideas behind exercises, combined with an appropriate
process of inquiry and completion of those exercises.

30% Process: the consistent and rigorous testing and advancement of design ideas that result in a refined
resolution and completion of designed work.

40% Resolution: mature demonstration of competence, completeness and finesse of a final design
through graphic representation, physical modeling, mockups, oral presentation and artifact making, whichnot only presents a broad conceptual basis for the final work but also indicates a thorough grasp of detail
and economy in the competent execution of the evidence-based research work.

Your work in these three areas will be evaluated on its evolution and thoroughness over the semester.
Grade Descriptions:

A/A- Excellent: Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual
language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques
above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.

B+/B/B- Above Average: Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully
completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve
required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.

C+/C Average: Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued
with dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.

C-/D+/D/D- Poor: Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of
presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and
knowledge base.

F Fail Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that
this grade will be assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.

X Excused Incomplete: Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply
not completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used
after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date.
Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which you are enrolling,
according to School of Architecture policy.

Attendance: Please see the opening paragraph and bullet points for scheduling requirements. Students
are expected to fully participate in those new attendance requirements. You are still required to be
present for full class discussions set by appointment and to be on time for individual reviews you have
set with your instructor. Failure to consistently do so will be treated similarly as described in the original
syllabus requirements.

Religious Observances: A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities,
including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A
student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and
Shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused
within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their
instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.

By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project inorder to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.

Academic Integrity: Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic
Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:

http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:

http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct

Mental Health and Support Services: Particularly during this time of added stress, please reach out to
the University Mental Health Services if you feel overwhelmed or unable to do your best work. If stress,
test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are
options available for help:
e In-house CARE counselor (see below)
e For immediate support
o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5" floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
Oo CMHC Crisis Line:
24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
e Free services at CMHC:
Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.htm|
MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html

OO 0 0

Care Program: Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health
professionals within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health
support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.

Laura Dannenmaier (LCSW) is the CARE Program Director and is the assigned CARE counselor for the
School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students may
directly reach out to her.

Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE simpson.html

Students with Disabilities: Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a
letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of
the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This
letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and
accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/

Campus Carry: Texas law permits individuals who have obtained a concealed handgun license (CHL) to
carry their loaded, concealed weapon in university buildings on campus. The university has determined
certain sensitive areas and buildings where concealed weapons will be prohibited. All students are to be
familiar with and abide by the publically displayed campus policies on the school’s official website.Security, Safety and Sustainability: The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place
for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint,
or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio that
is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio without
your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studio mates accountable
for the security of your shared space.

The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and reuse to
reduce material consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or any other
containers with white bags. The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system for students to donate
materials and take what they need for studio and fabrication coursework, is available throughout the
semester to all UT students in the UTSOA Technology Lab. All unwanted, reusable materials should be
brought to the Material Exchange station in the Technology Lab at the end of the semester.

BCAL: Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or
Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be
made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your
concerns.

Emergency Evacuation: |n the case of emergency evacuation:

e Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.

e Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the
building.

e Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors.

e Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services
offices.

Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:

www.utexas.edu/ emergency.