THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

Department of Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics

Unique Number:
Instructor:

Lecture Time:
Location:

Office Hours:
Teaching Assistants:
Web Page:

Text:

Additional References:

Catalog Description:

Course Objectives:

Prerequisites:

Computer:

Important dates:
Fri, June 19th
Fri, Jul 3rd

TBD, July 10/11

ASE 320 Low Speed Aerodynamics
Summer 2020

SYLLABUS

74639

Dr. Raghav Mahalingam

raghavmahalingam(austin.utexas.edu

M through F 11.30am-1pm

Zoom, Link available via Canvas Calender

By appointment

None

Canvas (canvas.utexas.edu)

Fundamentals of Aerodynamics, 6" edition

John D. Anderson, McGraw Hill

Fluid Mechanics, 6th Edition, Frank M. White, McGraw-Hill, 2003
Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 4th or later edition, Robert Fox, Alan
McDonald and Philip Pritchard, Wiley.

Fundamental concepts, fluid statics; integral and differential analysis;
detailed analysis of inviscid, incompressible flows; aerodynamics of
airfoils and wings. Three lecture hours a week for one semester.

To develop student knowledge of fluid properties, fluid statics, integral
and differential analysis of fluid flow problems, detailed analysis of
inviscid incompressible flow, aerodynamics of wings and airfoils.
Mathematics 427L and Mechanical Engineering 310T with a grade of
at least C- in each.

Homework problems might require the use of computer software tools
and simple programming. You are expected to know how to use a
computer.

Test 1, Via Canvas
Test 2, Via Canvas
Final Exam, Via Canvas

Note: No alternate date for the final. Check final exam schedule and location. If you have 3
finals on the same day, start preparing NOW.

Grading:

Homework: 15%

Two In-Class tests: 50% (25% each)

Final Exam: 35%Letter grades will be assigned as follows:

Bae [| B |B |e) c|]c |] DF

 

Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities Students Should Have Before Entering This Course:
Mathematics of calculus and differential equations and background in physics.

Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities Students Gain from this Course (Learning Outcomes):
Physical understanding of the various physical phenomena that can occur in fluid flow.

Basic tools of analysis of fluid mechanics: conservation of mass, momentum and energy and
equations of state. An understanding of the analysis of simple inviscid, incompressible flows and
the application of these to the flow over airfoils and finite wings.

Impact On Subsequent Courses In Curriculum:

The basic tools of fluid mechanics and the extensive applications to inviscid incompressible
flows, including airfoils and wings, serve as a foundation for subsequent courses in compressible
fluid mechanics (ASE 362K), applied aerodynamics (ASE 364), and propulsion (ASE 376K).

Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes:
This course contributes to the following ABET Criterion 3 outcomes and those specific to the
EAC accredited program.

Outcome ——____{¥ outcome _—_ Outcome

a. An ability to apply knowledge of g. An ability to communicate effectively
mathematics, science, and engineering

b. An ability to design and conduct h. the broad education necessary to

experiments, as well as to analyze and understand the impact of engineering

interpret data solutions in a global, economic,
environmental, and societal context.

c. an ability to design a system, 1. A recognition of the need for and an

component, or process to meet desired ability to engage in life-long learning

needs within realistic constraints such as

economic, environmental, social,

political, ethical, health and safety,

manufacturability, and sustainability.

d. An ability to function on multi- j. A knowledge of contemporary issues
disciplinary teams

e. An ability to identify, formulate, and 1 | k. An ability to use the techniques, skills,
solve engineering problems and modern engineering tools necessary
for engineering practice

f. An understanding of professional and
ethical responsibilitABET Program Criteria Achieved:
Program criteria are unique to each degree program and are to be compiled from the program
criteria given for each degree program and listed in table format below.

Criterion Vv IC riterion V |Criterion

A. Aerodynamics vo G. Orbital Mechanics bs rnc
Desig on

B. Aerospace Materials S| H. Space Environment | IN, Other Design Content |

C. Structures I. Attitude Determination| |O. Professionalism
and Control

D. Propulsion  |J.Telecommunications | _ P. Computer Usage
E. Flight Mechanics Vv K. Space Structures Pe Comperape
F. Stability and Control S| L. Rocket Propulsion VPTopics (#lectures):28
. Introduction (1)

2. Fundamental Concepts, Aerodynamic forces, moments and coefficients, Dimensional
Analysis (3)
Fluid Statics and Dynamics (2)
Methods of flow description, Control Volumes, Integral Relations (4)
Differential Analysis, continuity, Navier-Stokes (5)
Incompressible Inviscid Flow, Euler equations, Bernoulli’s equation (1)
Flow About Immersed Bodies, Drag, Lift (5)
Review lectures (3)
In-Class Tests (2)

SORA NMN RY

Professionalism Topics: none
Design Assignments: none
Laboratory Assignments: None

Class Format:
This is a lecture class. It will help you to read the relevant chapters before the lectures. Do not
schedule job interviews, plan trips, etc. which conflict with test dates. The final exam will be
comprehensive.

Class Outline:
See lecture outline at the end of this syllabus

Homework Policy:

Homework is essential to help you master the material. Typically 2-4 homework problems will
be assigned every week. There are a total of 9 regular homework assignments through the course
and 1 advisement appointment (HWX) for a total of 10 points. They are generally due at the start
of class on the day listed in this document. Homework solutions will be submitted on Canvas.
There will be no paper submissions. Solutions to the homework will be posted electronically
after the submission date and no homework will be accepted after it is posted unless you have
obtained prior permission. You are welcome to discuss the homework problems and solution
strategies with your classmates but solve the problems yourself. Copying homework from a
Legacy folder or from another student and presenting it as your own work is a violation of
professional ethics.

Examinations:
Two in-class tests and a final comprehensive exam. All exams will be closed book. Information
handouts (equations, data etc.) will be provided with the exam if needed.

Attendance:
Your grades are determined by your performance on tests and homework. I strongly encourage
you to attend class and I will not tutor you in my office on topics that were discussed in classesyou did not attend. Homework must be turned in on time to receive credit and you must attend
all tests unless you have a relevant documented reason for being absent.

Please do not schedule job interviews, plant trips, etc. which conflict with test dates. If a test
conflicts with a religious holiday that you observe, please notify me in advance so I can arrange
an alternate test date for you. The same rules apply to homework submission. If you are sick for
an exam please notify me beforehand via e-mail. A medical certificate 1s required for an excused
absence and a make-up test.

Evaluation:

UT Course-Instructor survey at the end of the semester. Feedback on my teaching 1s welcome at
any time. Tell me in person or send me a note. What you tell me early will benefit this class.
Feedback at the end of the semester benefits the next class.

Other Administrative Matters:

1) Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information please visit the
Student Judicial Services web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/

2) An engineering student must have the Dean’s approval to add or drop a course after the fourth
class day of the term. Adds or drops are not approved after this except for good cause. “Good
cause” is interpreted to be documented evidence of an extenuating nonacademic circumstance
(such as health or personal problems) that did not exist on or before the fourth class day.
Applications for approval to drop a course after the fourth class day should be made in the Office
of Student Affairs, ECJ 2.200.

3) Web-based, password-protected class sites are available for all accredited courses taught at
The University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that
may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in
class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail rosters will be a
component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class
rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building,
Room |. For information on restricting directory information see:
http://registrar.utexas.edu/students/records/restrictmyinfo

Course documents will be posted on Canvas

4) All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification
policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or
her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order
to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications
may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice
per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are
available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html. In this course e-mail will be
used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for checking your e-
mail regularly for class work and announcements.5) The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic adjustments
for qualified students with disabilities. Any student with a documented disability (physical or
cognitive) who requires academic accommodations should contact the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259.

http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd

6) By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be
given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.ASE 320 Expected Course Outline

jtecture# [Topics Sd Tests | Reading

4Jun Thu 1 Course Overview: Review Syllabus, Introduction
5Jun Fri 2 Basics of fluids, fluid properties and fields Chap 1
8-Jun Mon 3 Dimensional Analysis, Buckingham Pi theorem Chap 1
9-Jun Tue 4 Aerodynamics Forces and Moments, Coefficients Chap 1
10-Jun Wed 5 Fluid Statics Chap 1
1i-Jun Thu 6 Fluid Dynamics: Types of Flow Chap 1
12-Jun Fri 7 Calculus Review, 1D-2D-3D, Streamlines etc Chap 2
15-Jun Mon 8 Control Volumes and Reynolds Transport Theorem Chap 2
16-Jun Tue 9 Conservation of Mass, Momentum and Energy Chap 2
17-Jun Wed 10 Conservation of Mass, Momentum and Energy Chap 2
18-Jun Thu 11 Review for Test1 Chap 2
19-Jun Fri 12 In Class Test 1 Test 1
22-Jun Mon 13 Differential Analysis, continuity equation Chap 2
23-Jun Tue 14 Velocity Potential, Irrotational Flow Chap 2
24-Jun Wed 15 Stream Function, Simple fluid structures Chap 2
25-Jun Thu 16 Fluid Rotation, Circulation, Vorticity, fluid deformation Chap 2
26-Jun Fri 17 Derivation of Navier Stokes equations, similarity parameters Chap 3
29-Jun Mon 18 Inviscid, Incompressible Flow Intro, Euler Equation, Bernoulli equation Chap 3
30-Jun Tue 19 Flow over a circular cylinder Chap 3
1-Jul Wed 20 Magnus effect, Lift flows over a cylinder, Kutta Joukowski Theorem Chap 3
2-Jul Thu 21 Review for Test2
3-Jul Fri 22 In Class Test 2 Test 2
6Jul Mon 23 Kutta condition, Kelvins' Theorem, Classical Thin Airfoil Theory Chap 4
7-Jul Tue 24 Finite Wing Analysis Downwash, induced drag Chap 5
8-Jul Wed 25 Lifting Line Theory, Finite Wing Considerations Chap 5
9Jul Thu 26 Review for Final
10/1Uul Final Comprehensive

Prepared by: Raghav Mahalingam Date: 5/21/20